Employers’ 
Liability
(or relationships 
akin to 
employment)
Non-Delegable Duties and 
Vicarious Liability
Part 2/4
Week 17
Dr Sarah Gilmartin   s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
Vicarious Liability – What is it?
Liability for acts/omissions or torts of third parties
Relationship between tortfeasor and defendant
No fault of the person (e.g. employer) held liable to the claimant
Tortfeasor jointly liable
Theory – the right/wrong:
Master’s tort theory – master stands in place of servant
Servant’s tort theory – master is liable for the torts of servants
Vicarious Liability – How do we decide who 
is liable?
We look to the relationship between:
• Tortfeasor and Defendant (e.g. employee at fault for the tort and employer)
• In the course of employment:
‘Vicarious liability is a common law principle of strict, no-fault liability. Under this 
principle a blameless employer is liable for a wrong committed by his employee while 
the latter is about his employer's business. The time-honoured phrase is “while acting in 
the course of his employment”. It is thus a form of secondary liability. The primary 
liability is that of the employee who committed the wrong.’
Majrowski v Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Trust [2007] 1 AC 224, 228 per Lord Nicholls
Vicarious Liability: 
‘within the course of a contract of 
employment’
to
‘close connection’
The “Salmond” Test – J Salmond, Law of Torts (1st edn, 1907):
An employee’s tort will have been committed in the course of his employment if it was either:
a)
A wrongful act authorised by [the employee’s employer], or
b)
A wrongful and unauthorised mode of doing some act authorised by [the employee’s 
employer].
The “close connection” test - Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22, [28] per Lord Steyn:
‘The question is whether the warden's torts were so closely connected with his employment that 
it would be fair and just to hold the employers vicariously liable. On the facts of the case the 
answer is yes.’
Vicarious Liability – Stretching the ‘close 
connection’ test?
Mohamud v WM Morrison Supermarkets Plc 
[2016] UKSC 11 
2 stage test:
1.
Close connection – ‘what functions or “field of activities” 
have been entrusted by the employer to the employee, 
or, in everyday language, what was the nature of his job’ 
[44]; and
2.
Furtherance of employer’s business – ‘whether there 
was sufÏcient connection between the position in which 
he was employed and his wrongful conduct to make it 
right for the employer to be held liable under the 
principle of social justice’. [45]
See also: Bellman v Northampton 
Recruitment Ltd [2018] EWCA Civ 2214 
Vicarious Liability – Limiting the ‘close 
connection’ test
WM Morrison Supermarkets Plc v Various Claimants 
[2020] UKSC 12
[47] per Lord Reed
‘In the present case, it is abundantly clear that [the employee] 
was not engaged in furthering his employer's business when he 
committed the wrongdoing in question. On the contrary, he was 
pursuing a personal vendetta, seeking vengeance for the 
disciplinary proceedings some months earlier. In those 
circumstances...[the employee’s] wrongful conduct was not so 
closely connected with acts which he was authorised to do 
that...it can fairly and properly be regarded as done by him while 
acting in the ordinary course of his employment.’
See: Joel v Morison (1834) 172 ER 1338 – ‘a frolic of his own’
Vicarious Liability: 
‘akin to employment’ 
1/2
Various Claimants v The Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools [2012] UKSC 56
At [35] per Lord Phillips:
i.
the employer is more likely to have the means to compensate the victim than the employee and can 
be expected to have insured against that liability; 
ii.
the tort will have been committed as a result of activity being taken by the employee on behalf of the 
employer; 
iii.
the employee's activity is likely to be part of the business activity of the employer; 
iv.
the employer, by employing the employee to carry on the activity will have created the risk of the tort 
committed by the employee; [and]
v.
the employee will, to a greater or lesser degree, have been under the control of the employer.
Followed in Cox v Ministry of Justice [2016] UKSC 10 and Armes v NotÝnghamshire County Council [2017] 
UKSC 60 (see Lecture Notes Part 1)
Vicarious Liability: 
‘akin to employment’ 
2/2
Various Claimants [2012] UKSC 56, [21] per Lord 
Phillips:
i.
The first stage is to consider the relationship of 
D1 and D2 to see whether it is one that is 
capable of giving rise to vicarious liability. 
ii.
What is critical at the second stage is the 
connection that links the relationship between 
D1 and D2 and the act or omission of D1.
Partnership/Agency
Cox v Ministry of Justice [2016] UKSC 10, [2] 
per Lord Reed:
‘The scope of vicarious liability depends upon 
the answers to two questions. First, what sort 
of relationship has to exist between an 
individual and a defendant before the 
defendant can be made vicariously liable in 
tort for the conduct of that individual? 
Secondly, in what manner does the conduct of 
that individual have to be related to that 
relationship, in order for vicarious liability to be 
imposed on the defendant?’
More Recent Developments:
Sexual Assault Cases 
Trustees of the Barry Congregation of 
Jehovah's Witnesses (Appellant) v BXB 
(Respondent) [2023] UKSC 15
•
T was an elder in the D’s church and C was a 
member of the congregation
•
C & T (and their families) had been friends for 
many years
•
T made C uncomfortable – but another elder 
(T’s father) said T needed support – for this 
reason and this reason alone C continued to 
see T.
•
After a day evangelising and at T’s house, T 
raped C
Question for the court: were the Jehovah’s 
Witness organisation vicariously liable for T?
Test for VL confirmed (and applied to such cases):
1. Was the relationship between T and the organisation 
one capable of giving rise to VL? A contract of 
employment or akin to employment? Yes 
(but note: ‘The creation of the risk of rape should 
not have been included within the criteria [by the 
lower courts] for deciding whether the relationship 
was akin to employment.’ [69] per Lord Burrows
2.
Close connection test? No 
‘was...the wrongful conduct, the rape,...so closely 
connected with acts that the tortfeasor...was 
authorised to do, that the rape can fairly and 
properly be regarded as committed by him while 
acting in the course of his quasiemployment as an 
elder’? [71] per Lord Burrows
How has Barry been applied?
See, for example: MXX v A Secondary School [2023] EWCA Civ 996
•
Followed Barry
•
C’s claim against D was successful in principle only on appeal to the CA – D was not vicariously 
liable for the torts of T
•
C was a schoolchild
•
C came into contact with T during T’s work experience placement (WEP)
•
C appealed – the trial judge had found there was not a relationship akin to employment between T 
and D
•
CA found that there was a relationship akin to employment between T and D (success in principle).
•
C was sexually assaulted by T after his WEP had ended – D was not liable for this tort (assault and 
battery), as there was not a sufÏciently close connection between the tort and T’s employment
•
T had, however, groomed C during his WEP - (further success in principle), however, there was still 
not a sufÏciently close connection between the tort (intentional infliction of injury) and T’s 
employment for the D to be vicariously liable.
MCQ Practice
Click the link or scan the QR Code
MCQ Employers' Liability Part 1 and 2
Employers’ 
Liability
(or relationships 
akin to 
employment)
To be 
continued…
Non-Delegable Duties and 
Vicarious Liability
Part 2/4
Week 17
Dr Sarah Gilmartin   s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
