Employers’ 
Liability
(or 
relationships 
akin to 
employment)
Non-Delegable Duties and 
Vicarious Liability
Part 1/4
Week 17
Dr Sarah Gilmartin   s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
Drop-in hours: make an appointment
CONTENT 
NOTICE
(Weeks 17 and 
18)
Aims of the Lectures (Employers’ 
Liability)
By the end of the lectures in Weeks 17-18 you will:
Appreciate that NDD and VL are not torts, but a means to establish a Defendant’s liability;
Understand NDD and VL’s interactions with torts that you are already familiar;
Understand the development of the laws in relation to NDD and VL;
Understand and know when to consider the laws on NDD and VL;
Know which elements to apply to determine a defendant's liability for breach of NDD or to 
hold them liable for the actions/omissions of a third party (VL).
Is it Personal (NDD) or Vicarious?
‘A non-delegable duty of care is often described as a duty to ensure that reasonable care is 
taken and the idea is that [the employer] will breach it simply because [a third 
party/employee] fails to take such care...
A non-delegable duty of care is distinct from an ordinary duty of care [to take care such as 
is reasonable in all the circumstances of the case] because [an employer] can breach the 
former even if he has taken reasonable care...whereas to breach the latter he himself must 
fail to take reasonable care...
And liability arising under a non-delegable duty is distinct from vicarious liability because, 
in relation to the former type of liability, nothing in particular turns on the relationship 
between [employer] and [a third party/employee] whereas that is of central importance to 
the latter species of liability...'
Goudcamp & Nolan 
(eds), Winfield 
and Jolowicz on Tort (20th 
edn, Sweet & Maxwell 
2020) at 597
Non-
Delegable 
Duties 1/4
•Priestly v Fowler (1837) 150 ER 1030  - Common Employment
•Law Reform (Personal Injuries) Act 1948, s 1(1) - It shall not be a 
defence to an employer who is sued in respect of personal injuries 
caused by the negligence of a person employed by him, that that 
person was at the time the injuries were caused in common 
employment with the person injured.
•Wilsons and Clyde Coal Co Ltd v English [1938] A.C. 57: 'The 
obligation is fulfilled by the exercise of due care and skill. But it is not 
fulfilled by entrusting its fulfilment to employees, even though 
selected with due care and skill. The obligation is threefold - "the 
provision of a competent staff..., adequate material, and a proper 
system and effective supervision"'. Lord Wright at 78 citing Lord 
M'Laren  in Bett v Dalmaney Oil Co. Ltd (1905) 7 F. 787, 790
Statutory Duties Giving Rise to Non-
Delegable Duties 
Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974
(S.2 for general duties of employers to their employees) 
 Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992
Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 1998
Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999
Work at Height Regulations 2005 
Statutory instruments (Regulations) owned and enforced by H
SE/Local Authorities
General Cleaning Contractors Ltd v Christmas [1953] AC 180
‘Where a practice of ignoring an obvious danger has grown up I do not think that it is reasonable 
to expect an individual workman to take the initiative in devising and using precautions. It is the 
duty of the employer to consider the situation, to devise a suitable system, to instruct his men 
what they must do and to supply any implements that may be required’. per Lord Reid at 194
https://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/overview.htm
Non-Delegable 
Duties
2/4
Wilsons and Clyde Coal Co Ltd v English [1938] A.C. 57: ‘What is the extent of 
the duty attaching to the employer? Such a duty is the employer's personal duty, 
whether he performs or can perform it himself, or whether he does not perform it 
or cannot perform it save by servants or agents. A failure to perform such a duty 
is the employer's personal negligence. This was held to be the case where the 
duty was statutory, and it is equally so when the duty is one attaching at 
common law.’ 
Lord Wright at 83-84
Cassidy v Ministry of Health [1951] 2 K.B. 343: ‘I take it to be clear law, as well 
as good sense, that, where a person is himself under a duty to use care, he 
cannot get rid of his responsibility by delegating the performance of it to 
someone else, no matter whether the delegation be to a servant under a contract 
of service or to an independent contractor under a contract for services.’ 
Denning LJ at 363
Non-Delegable 
Duties: 
Independent 
Contractors
3/4
Woodland v Swimming Teachers Association [2013] UKSC 66
•Extension of Wilson to independent contractors and a case outside of employment
•School swimming lesson 
•School contracted out to agency at Local Authority swimming pool
•Ten year old Claimant suffered head injury and hypoxic induced brain injuries
•‘Where a non-delegable duty arises, the defendant is liable not because he has control but 
in spite of the fact that he may have none. The essential element in my view is not control of 
the environment in which the claimant is injured, but control over the claimant for the 
purpose of performing a function for which the defendant has assumed responsibility.’ per 
Lord Sumption 583-4
Non-Delegable 
Duties: 
Independent 
Contractors
Continued…
Defining features of non-delegable duty per Lord Sumption at 583: 
1) The claimant is a patient or a child, or for some other reason is especially 
vulnerable or dependent on the protection of the defendant against the 
risk of injury…
2) There is an antecedent [i.e. prior] relationship between the claimant and 
the defendant, independent of the negligent act or omission itself
i.
which places the claimant in the actual custody, charge or care of the 
defendant, and 
ii.
from which it is possible to impute to the defendant the assumption 
of a positive duty to protect the claimant from harm, and not just a 
duty to refrain from conduct which will foreseeably damage the 
claimant. It is characteristic of such relationships that they involve an 
element of control over the claimant, which varies in intensity from 
one situation to another, but is clearly very substantial in the case of 
schoolchildren. 
3)
The claimant has no control over 
how the defendant chooses to 
perform those obligations, i.e. 
whether personally or through 
employees or through third 
parties. 
4)
The defendant has delegated to 
a third party some function 
which is an integral part of the 
positive duty which he has 
assumed towards the claimant; 
and the third party is exercising, 
for the purpose of the function 
thus delegated to him, the 
defendant's custody or care of 
the claimant and the element of 
control that goes with it. 
5)
The 
third 
party 
has 
been 
negligent not in some collateral 
respect but in the performance 
of the very function assumed by 
the defendant and delegated by 
the defendant to him. 
Non-Delegable Duties: Some Case 
Law 4/4
•Latimer v AEC Ltd [1953] AC 643 – inordinate amount of water on floor – negligence – breach – standard (cost of precautions) – there 
are limits on what an employer must do to fulfil their duty of care (on non-delegable duties) 
•Paris v Stepney BC [1951] AC 367 – one eyed worker – negligence – breach – standard (magnitude of harm) – non-delegable duties have 
individual application
•James-Bowen and others v Metropolitan Police Commissioner [2018] UKSC 40 – OfÏcers sued for assault – litigation conducted by 
Police Force – duty of care – incrementalism – relationship between police ofÏcers and force analogous to employment – duty does not 
extend to conduct of litigation – the imposition of such a duty would not be fair, just or reasonable. 
•Hudson v Ridge [1957] 2 Q.B. 348 – employee known to engage in practical jokes – the Wilson obligations – provision of competent staff 
and safe place of work – D knew and had warned the employee – employer owed injured Claimant non-delegable duty.
•W v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2000] 1 W.L.R. 1607 – bullying and harassment in the workplace – the Wilson 
obligations – provision of competent staff and safe place of work – police relationship analagous to employer/employee and non-
delegable duty owed.
Armes v Nottinghamshire County 
Council [2017] UKSC 60 
•The bridge between non-delegable duties and vicarious liability
•Compare with Woodland v Swimming Teachers Association [2013] UKSC 66
•Claimant foster child sexually and physically abused by foster carers appointed by Local Authority
•The Local Authority did not have a non-delegable duty of care – a policy decision?
•But the Local Authority were vicariously liable for the torts of the foster carers.
NDD
VL
Additional Reading 
(Weeks 17 and 18 & Workshop 9)

Warren Swain, “A Historical Examination of Vicarious Liability: A Veritable Upas Tree” [2019] CLJ 640.

Emily Gordon, Mohamud Explained and Re-Understanding "Close Connection" in Vicarious Liability' (2020) Vol 9(3) 
Cambridge Law Journal 401-404

Stephen Tood, 'Personal liability, vicarious liability, non-delegable duties and protecting vulnerable people' (2016) 
Vol 23(2) Torts Law Journal 105-138

Paula Gilliker, 'Analysing Institutional Liability for Child Sexual Abuse in England and Wales and Australia: Vicarious 
Liability, Non-Delegable Duties and Statutory Intervention' (2018) Vol 77(3) Cambridge Law Journal 506-535

Simon Deakin, 'Organisational Torts: Vicarious Liability Versus Non-Delegable Duties' (2018) Vol 77(1) Cambridge 
Law Journal 15-18

Christian WitÝng, 'Breach of the Non-delegable Duty: Defending Limited Strict Liability in Tort' (2006) 
Vol 29(3) University of New South Wales Law Journal 38-60

J Murphy, 'The Liability Bases of Common Law Non-Delegable Duties – A Reply to Christian WitÝng' (2007) Vol 30(1) 
University of New South Wales Law Journal 86-102
Employers’ 
Liability
(or relationships 
akin to 
employment)
To be 
continued…
Non-Delegable Duties and 
Vicarious Liability
Part 1/4
Week 17
Dr Sarah Gilmartin   s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
