LAW OF TORT
Theory and Critique 
of Tort Law
LAW OF TORT
Theories of tort law
Teleological (instrumental) theories of 
tort:
• Compensation-Deterrence 
• Enterprise Liability
• Economic Deterrence 
Deontic (intrinsic) theories of tort:
• Corrective Justice
• Rights Theory
LAW OF TORT
Strengths of teleological 
theories
Explain the prevalence of “policy” reasoning in tort cases
Provide clear aims for tort law — maximise the given value
Help justify tort’s imposition of costs on society by 
explaining the beneﬁts for society
Good explanations of some bits – e.g. vicarious liability or 
product liability 
LAW OF TORT
Weaknesses of 
teleological theories
Struggle to explain the prevalence of “principled” 
reasoning 
Struggle to explain “individualised” features of tort law
Tort always seems not to be the most eﬃcient means of 
promoting any of the given values 
LAW OF TORT
Strengths of deontic 
theories 
Explain the prevalence of “principled” reasoning
Explain tort on its own terms and provide intuitive 
explanations for “individualised” features of tort
Good explanations of some bits – e.g. intentional torts 
LAW OF TORT
Weaknesses of deontic 
theories 
Struggle to explain the prevalence of “policy” reasoning
Struggle to explain why costs imposed on society
Struggle to explain lack of personal responsibility – e.g. 
insurance
“Structural” rather than “substantive”, so can seem empty
Lord Sumption’s 
Critique of Tort Law
LAW OF TORT
The costs for society
Personal injury claims are 1% of the UK’s GDP
Cost spread evenly across society by insurance and tax
Legal/admin costs are 47% of personal injury claims
Reduction in insurance capacity/withdrawal from markets
If the costs of tort fall on society at large, then tort should 
beneﬁt society at large – it should maximise well-being
LAW OF TORT
Does tort beneﬁt society?
Even distribution of costs, but uneven distribution of 
beneﬁts — injury caused by another gets you lots, injury 
not caused by another gets you little
Wealth is irrelevant to liability + compensation
Lawyers and courts more expensive than social security
No evidence showing deterrent eﬀect because of insurance
LAW OF TORT
Why do people approve of tort 
law if it does not beneﬁt society?
Sumption thinks there are two reasons why most people 
instinctively approve of tort law:
1. people believe in the principle that ‘he who causes injury 
must make it good’; and
2. people believe it is the proper function of the courts to 
ﬁnd facts and distribute blame, for the satisfaction of the 
victims.
LAW OF TORT
Negligence not morally culpable
Negligence ≠ recklessness. 
Negligence = falling below the ‘objective standard’ 
imposed by law – the ‘reasonable person’
Objective standard ≠ moral concepts like blame and 
responsibility – e.g. near-strict liability in road traﬃc 
accidents
LAW OF TORT
Negligence only 
justiﬁable by social utility 
If negligence is just a normal feature of human behaviour 
and not morally culpable, then it must be justiﬁed by social 
utility.
“Yet the arbitrary results and incomplete coverage of a 
fault-based system, combined with its prodigious cost and 
unwelcome side-eﬀects, seriously undermine the social 
utility of the law of tort as a way of dealing with personal 
injury.”
Defending Tort Law
LAW OF TORT
Three ways of defending 
tort law
We might disagree with:
1. the premises;
2. the conclusions; or
3. the practicality of alternatives. 
LAW OF TORT
The premise: corrective 
justice not social utility
Sumption says the objective standard isn’t justiﬁed by 
notions like blame and responsibility, so it must be justiﬁed 
by “social utility”. 
But what if there is another justiﬁcation he hasn’t 
considered?
Corrective justice
LAW OF TORT
The premise: corrective 
justice not social utility
“If, for instance, a man is born hasty and awkward, is 
always having accidents and hurting himself or his 
neighbors, no doubt his congenital defects will be allowed 
for in the courts of heaven, but his slips are no less 
troublesome to his neighbors than if they sprang from 
guilty neglect.” (OW Holmes)
LAW OF TORT
The premise: corrective 
justice not social utility
“Unlike personal responsibility, which focuses on an agent, 
corrective justice is concerned with fairness in interactions 
between persons.”
“According to corrective justice theory, the point of [the 
objective] standard is to judge the behaviour of the defendant, 
not in terms of the defendant’s talents, abilities, etc. (as would 
a subjective standard), nor in terms of the claimant’s interests 
alone (as would strict liability in these circumstances), but in 
terms of a standard fair as between the parties.”
(A Beever, ‘Corrective Justice and Personal Responsibility’)
LAW OF TORT
The conclusions: does tort 
maximise utility?
Tort still deters even with insurance — no claims bonus, 
insurers involved in increased safety, organisational 
liability still eﬀective
BUT…in reality, is it unarguable that tort genuinely 
achieves optimal deterrence by minimising the sum of: (i) 
the costs of accident prevention; (ii) the costs resulting 
from accidents; and (iii) the costs of administering the 
system. 
LAW OF TORT
The alternatives: compensation 
schemes
Two options for reform: 
(A) accident compensation schemes, and 
(B) compensation for all injuries, however caused.
LAW OF TORT
Alternative (A): no-fault 
compensation schemes
Beneﬁt of (A) = removes ‘fault-discrimination’
BUT…
Downside of (A) = ‘cause-discrimination’— accident 
victims still end up better oﬀ than people born with 
disability
LAW OF TORT
Alternative (B): no-cause 
compensation schemes
Two options for alternative (B):
(i) full compensation for all injuries; or
(ii) equalising compensation for all injuries at lower level.
Neither is practical. The problem with (i) is that it is vastly 
too expensive. The problem with (ii) is that is strips rights 
from accident victims and is unlikely to have any support or 
win votes. 
