Privacy
in Tort Law
DR. MEGAN RAE BLAKELY
LANCASTER UNIVERSITY 
1
Signposts
What is privacy in tort?
Common law basis
Balance of human rights
2
No overarching privacy tort….
Many historical legislative attempts failed. 
Why?
‘To draft a law defining a right to privacy which is both specific in its guidance but also flexible 
enough to apply fairly to each case which would be tested against it could be almost 
impossible. Many people would not want to seek redress through the law, for reasons of cost 
and risk. In any case, we are not persuaded that there is significant public support for a 
privacy law.’
- Culture, Media and Sport Committee ‘Self Regulation of the Press’ Seventh Report 
of Session 2006–
2007 (HC 375, July 2007) [53].
3
Kaye v Robertson and Sport 
Newspapers Ltd [1991] FSR 
62 (CA)
- Kaye (‘Allo ‘Allo) hospitalised with brain injuries due 
to a billboard falling on his car.
- He was ‘interviewed’ in hospital when semi-
conscious by Sunday Sport, which published the 
interview as a ‘scoop’.  The story stated Kaye had 
consented to the interview.
- He had no memory of the interview or 
photographs.
- Alleging ‘invasion of privacy’ but sought injunction 
under: defamation, passing off, malicious falsehood, 
and trespass to the person.
Image: Gordon Kaye dead: Actor famous for 
René in 'Allo 'Allo dies aged 75, The 
Independent, 23 Jan. 2017.
4
Kaye, cont’d
Defamation, passing off, and trespass to the person failed; 
no right to privacy.

NB: ONLY malicious falsehood succeeded, but we do not cover that tort this year.
Claims must fit in existing ‘boxes of liability’ 
(ie, avoiding judicial intervention/activism)
‘If ever a person has a right to be let alone by strangers with no public interest 
to pursue, it must surely be when he lies in hospital recovering from brain 
surgery and in no more than partial command of his faculties. It is this invasion 
of his privacy which underlies the [claimant’s] complaint. Yet it alone, however 
gross, does not entitle him to relief in English law. (Bingham LJ at 70)
5
The Leveson Inquiry 2011-12
(report into media practices)
Press was ‘self-regulated’ under the Press Complaints Commission (PCC, dissolved in 
2014); no ‘teeth’.
Recommendations around respect for privacy, factual accuracy, freedom of 
expression, and public interest.
Backed by sanctions, apologies/corrections, and financial penalties.
Created the Independent Press Standards Organisation (IPSO).
Effectiveness?
Scheduled ‘Leveson 2’ has been repeatedly set aside by successive governments
6
Privacy?
‘…no overarching, all-encompassing cause of action 
for “invasion of privacy.” (Lord Nicholls, dissenting in 
Campbell v MGN).
However….
HRA 1998
Breach of confidence
New(ish) tort of misuse of private information
7
HRA 1998Summary
Art. 8(1):   Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home 
and his correspondence.
Art. 10(1)-(2):  Freedom of expression (more upcoming).
s. 12(1): This section applies if a court is considering whether to grant any relief which, 
if granted, might affect the exercise of the Convention right to freedom of expression.
12(4) is our relevant provision (more upcoming). 
HRA Can’t create new cause of action for individuals but "if there is a relevant cause of 
action, the court as a public authority must act compatibly with both parties' Convention 
rights.’ – Campbell v MGN [2004] UKHL 27
‘horizontal effect’
8
Art. 10, HRA 1998

(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold 
opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority 
and regardless of frontiers. This Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of 
broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.
(2) The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be 
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are 
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public 
safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the 
protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information 
received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
9
s. 12 HRA 1998
(4)The court must have particular regard to the importance of the 
Convention right to freedom of expression and, where the proceedings 
relate to material which the respondent claims, or which appears to the 
court, to be journalistic, literary or artistic material (or to conduct 
connected with such material), to—
(a)the extent to which—
(i)the material has, or is about to, become available to the public; or
(ii)it is, or would be, in the public interest for the material to be 
published;
(b)any relevant privacy code.
10
Breach of Confidence Development
1) information exists which has ‘the 
necessary element of confidence about 
it’;
2) the defendant could be said to be 
obliged to keep the information 
confidential; and
3) ‘unauthorised use’ of the information 
was made by the defendant.
Coco v AN Clark (Engineers) 
Ltd [1968] (duty required)
‘…confidential information comes to the 
knowledge of a person … in circumstances 
where he has notice or is held to have 
agreed that the information is confidential 
with the effect that it would be just in all 
the circumstances that he should be 
precluded from disclosing the information 
to others. ’
Attorney General v Guardian 
Newspapers 
Ltd (No 2) [1990] 
(expanded how duty 
could arise)
11
Douglas, Zeta-Jones and 
Northern & Shell plc v Hello! 
Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 595 (CA)
Unpublished location and date of wedding with £1m contract for OK! magazine to 
exclusively publish photos.
Freelance photographer sneaked past security, took photos, and sold them to Hello!
Did not matter the number at reception so long as it was known to be private.
Breach of confidence found based on Coco, and Hello! Should have realised there was 
an ‘obligation of confidence.’
NB: CoA states the HRA did not create a new ‘privacy’ law
Financial damages awarded to Douglas and later to OK!
12
13
Campbell v MGN [2004] UKHL 22
‘Naomi: I am a drug addict’ (2001 The Mirror)
Claim framed as breach of confidence, as any ‘reasonable person’ would 
understand treatment details were confidential (although her drug addition 
was not as she brought this information forward herself).
£3,500 in damages and costs to Campbell
If ‘a person receives information he knows or ought to know is fairly and 
reasonably to be regarded as confidential’, this creates the tort of ‘misuse of 
private information’. Campbell.
14
Misuse of private information
1) Did the claimant have a ‘reasonable expectation of 
privacy’ regarding the information? If so;
2) Does the claimant’s interest in maintaining their 
right to privacy outweigh the defendant’s interest in 
freedom of expression (i.e., the ability to publish the 
information)?
15
1. ‘Reasonable expectation of 
privacy’
Should be ‘obvious’, offensive to a ‘person of ordinary 
sensibilities.
Sexual activities
Password protected photo storage
Evictions
May lose reasonable expectation with public knowledge.
NB: unlikely any reasonable expectation for work 
emails/storage
16
2. Balance privacy with freedom of 
expression
Public interest, e.g.:
Law enforcement?
Publicly elected ofÏcials?
17
Duke of Sussex & Lord Watson v News Group 
Newspapers (The Sun & News of the World) [settled 
2025]
18
Workshop 7 Preview:
-Long running legal battle due to be heard in High 
Court has settled
‘Prince Harry's team hailed the deal that stopped the 
trial as a "monumental victory", receiving an 
undisclosed amount of "substantial damages" and an 
"unequivocal apology“’ 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/live/cd9qqj3gvv1t
- Read and consider: is settlement the best outcome 
for legal claims for misuse of private information? 
Why would they apologise [for the first time in any 
litigation] and settle?
Img: Reuters/BBC, 2025
Modern approach: children
Murray v Express [2008] EWCA 446 (CA)
Rowling (Murray) sought damages and injunction for long lens photos 
of her 18 mo. old son, David, in public.  High Court case fails as there is 
no ‘press-free zone’ in‘an area of routine activity which, when 
conducted in a public place, carries no guarantee of privacy’.
Overturned at CoA, finding children may have a reasonable 
expectation of privacy even in public, especially if interest is solely 
based on celebrity status of parents.  Variety of relevant factors 
including nature of activity.
Best interests of the child should be considered.
19
Modern approach: 
limits

 is it a ‘big deal’? Aka how identifiable or 
damaging 

Mosley v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2008]: 
‘‘In public he rejects his father’s evil past but 
secretly he plays Nazi sex games’.  Posted video 
of ‘sick Nazi orgy,’ viewed by 3.5 m people. 
no public interest or other justification for the 
clandestine recording…such behaviour is 
viewed by some people with distaste and 
moral disapproval, but in the light of modern 
rights-based jurisprudence that does not 
provide any justification for the intrusion on 
the personal privacy of the claimant. (at 
[233]).
20
Modern approach: Limits
(aka, is this not ‘invasion of privacy’?)
Wainwright v Home OfÏce [2003]: ‘sloppily 
performed’ strip search on woman (other recourse 
was available)
no ‘information’ – bodily autonomy is not a cause of 
action
non-celebrity, non-publication.
21
Contemporary challenges: for 
thought

GDPR (General Data Protection Regulations)

AI Act
Smartphones?
Voice recognition?
Locations?
Self-driving vehicles?
Virtual spaces? 
AI-generated art and content?
The unknown!
22
Reluctance to create additional 
remedy
Kaye: Existing ‘boxes’ liability
Douglas: breach of confidence (‘obligation of 
confidence’)
Wainwright: limits to misuse of information
Campbell v MGN ‘… cannot, even if it 
wanted to, develop a general tort of 
invasion of privacy.’ Lady Hale
23
Privacy is….
Underpinned by HRA 1998 Arts 8 and 10, via s. 12.
Breach of confidence or
Misuse of private information
Two-stage test:
1) Did the claimant have a ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’ regarding the 
information? If so;
2) Does the claimant’s interest in maintaining their right to privacy outweigh 
the defendant’s interest in freedom of expression (i.e., the ability to publish the 
information)?
24
