Occupiers’ Liability 
Acts (OLA)
1957 and 1984
DR. MEGAN B L AKELY
M. BL AKELY@L ANCASTER.AC. UK
Signposts
 - The scope of the OLAs 
 - OLA 1957
 - OLA Cases
 - Please have the full text of the statute available if possible. 
 * Remember to check in.
Occupiers’ Liability
 Liability of occupiers for people injured or property where loss/injury 
results from danger related to state of occupier’s premises
 Such liability developed under the common law (Now primarily 
governed by statute)
Partial codification of negligence liability (duty and breach)
Occupiers Liability Act 1957 – liability in respect of lawful visitors
Occupiers Liability Act 1984 – liability in respect of trespassers/ non-
visitors
Pre-requisites for the 
OLAs
 1) D is an occupier
 2) Incident occurred at relevant premises under the OLAs
 3) Danger is an occupancy (static) danger, as opposed to activity
OLA Codification 
Summary
- Duty: 
- Visitors: s 2(1) OLA 1957
- Trespassers: s 1(3) OLA 1984
- Breach:
- Visitors: establish standard of care s2(3)(a); prove breach; 
consider any mitigations, specialist visitors s2(3)(b), warnings 
s2(4)(a); and/or independent contractors s2(b)(b)
- Trespassers: standard of care, breach, but only warnings s1(5)
- Causation: common law
- Remoteness: common law
OLA 1957
 Duty of care owed by OCCUPIERS to lawful visitors
 Who is an Occupier under the Act?
◦S 1 (2) Occupier is someone who would be treated as such under common 
law
◦Wheat v E Lacon & Co Ltd [1966]
◦Degree of control exerted over premises 
Premises 
 Premises; s1(3)(a) the obligations of a person occupying or having 
control over any fixed or moveable structure, including any vessel, 
vehicle or aircraft
Occupiers
 Private Occupiers:
 In non-business occupier cases, if the occupier has taken reasonable 
steps to bring the notice to the attention of a visitor, it will be effective.
  
 Private occupiers can determine the conditions upon which people 
enter the land. 
 Ashdown v Williams [1957] 1 QB 409: business occupiers 
Business Occupiers (FYI 
only!)
 The definition of business liability is contained in UCTA, s. 1(3)(b):
      “liability arising from occupation of premises used for business purposes of 
occupier”
 If there is business occupier, the following provisions apply:
◦UCTA, s. 2(1) prohibition on notices excluding liability for death and personal injury by 
negligence applies;
◦UCTA, s. 2(2): reasonableness of excluding liability, by use of a notice, for other forms of 
loss caused by negligence.
◦NB UCTA, s.1(1)(c):includes liability under OLA 1957 in its definition of negligence.  It 
therefore covers the ability of an occupier to exclude liability that would otherwise arise 
under that Act.
But remember the important difference between a warning of danger and a notice excluding 
liability: s. 2(4)(a) only applies to warnings.
OLA 1957 
 Duty owed?
◦S 2 (1) Common duty of care 
◦S 2 (2) “Common duty of care is a duty to take such care as in all the 
circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor will be 
reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is invited 
or permitted by the occupier to be there.”
◦Nature of the duty owed depends upon the: 
◦Nature of the danger
◦Length of time the danger was in existence
◦Steps necessary to remove the danger
◦Likelihood of the injury being caused
Lawful Entrants: Visitors 
(OLA 1957)
 Who is a lawful entrant?
◦Anyone with permission to be there (see guidance s 1 (2))
◦Visitor or contractual entrant
◦Can either be express or implied and those with a right to be there as conferred by law (s 2 
(6)).
◦Purpose of visit important: 
‘When you invite a person into your house to use the staircase, you do not 
invite him to slide down the banisters, you invite him to use the staircase in 
the ordinary way in which it is used.’ 
- Scrutton LJ, The ‘Carlgarth’ [1927] 
◦Occupier will only owe the visitor a duty in respect of the purpose for which they are visiting
◦Tomlinson v Congleton [2003]
Lawful Entrants: Visitors 
(OLA 1957)
Express or implied (on the facts)
-Three categories: 
- Invitees (eg, guest at a party)
- Licensees at common law (eg, postal worker)
- Right conferred by law (eg, police ofÏcer stopping breach of peace)
 Glasgow Corp v Taylor [1922] 1 AC 44
 Jolley v Sutton LBC [2000] 1 WLR 1082
Jolley v Sutton (small advice 
break…) 
council flats at Hayling 
Court at North Cheam 
in Surrey; ‘grassed area 
where children played’
AKA WHY 
LAWTEACHER.NET 
ET AL. ARE BAD.
 - council flats at Hayling Court at 
North Cheam in Surrey; ‘grassed area 
where children played’
 - ‘beach’
 - why do we care?
Special classes of visitor 
Children
◦Special precautions to be taken where children are concerned; s 2 (3) (a) 
◦Jolley v Sutton LBC [2000]
◦Glasgow Corporation v Taylor [1922] 
◦Bourne Leisure v Marsden [2009] 
◦Phipps v Rochester Corporation[1955]
Persons exercising a ‘calling’ are also recognised as a special class of 
visitor
◦They will be expected to ‘appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily 
incident to it;’ – s 2 (3) (b)
◦Roles v Nathan [1963]
◦Eden v West [2002] EWCA Civ 991 (but must be given appropriate information)
Independent 
contractors
 The defendant occupier may have discharged his duty even though injury befalls a visitor if 
the injury can be attributed to the fault of an independent contractor who has worked on 
the occupier's premises.
 Section 2(4)(b) imposes three requirements for this to occur:
   (4)In determining whether the occupier of premises has discharged the common duty of 
care to a visitor, regard is to be had to all the circumstances, so that (for example)—
◦(a)where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he had been warned by the 
occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from 
liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably 
safe; and
◦(b)where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger due to the faulty execution of any work 
of construction, maintenance or repair by an independent contractor employed by the 
occupier, the occupier is not to be treated without more as answerable for the danger if in 
all the circumstances he had acted reasonably in entrusting the work to an independent 
contractor and had taken such steps (if any) as he reasonably ought in order to satisfy 
himself that the contractor was competent and that the work had been properly done.
Defences: Volenti & 
Cont. Neg.
◦Volenti [consent] - “The common duty of care does not impose on an occupier any 
obligation to a visitor in respect of risks willingly accepted as his by the visitor...” – s 2 
(5) OLA 1957
◦Darby v National Trust [2001] PIQR P27
◦Contributory Negligence – reduces damages
 
Defences: Warnings 
◦OLA 1957, s 2(4)(a) – may be a defence but depends on circumstances... 
◦“Where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he had been 
warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more 
as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it 
was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe…”
◦Warnings 
◦Staples v West Dorset District Council [1995] PIQR 439
◦With obvious danger, no need to warn
◦Darby v National Trust [2001] EWCA 189 
◦Similarly obvious risks of open nature
Next class…
- OLA 1957 Review
- OLA 1984
- Please review both OLAs in full
