PASSING OFF
Megan Rae Blakely
m.blakely@lancaster.ac.uk
Lancaster University Law School
TRADE MARK BASICS
Protect goodwill of a trader from misrepresentation and prevent consumer 
confusion
May be comprised of: 
Letter, word, name, signature, numeral, brand, label, packaging, shape, colour, 
sound or scent that are used to distinguish one product from another. 
Cannot be:
Offensive, misleading (“Organic”), too descriptive, too common
Used to establish market presence
Trade Marks Act 1994 (you don’t need to know this for tort!)
TM REGISTRATION
Register ownership of the mark for commercial use, renewable every 10 
years.
Benefits:
Use of the ® to indicate the brand is protected (deterrent function)
Prevent competitors from registering
Right to bring suit for infringement
Licensing/franchising
Prima facie evidence of validity in the event of a dispute
Obtaining registration in new territories
PASSING OFF
Where trademark disputed/fails or was not registered…Passing off might 
succeed!
Similarly…. protect goodwill and prevent consumer confusion
No intent to deceive required  (Interflora Inc v Marks and Spencer plc [2012]); 
we are looking for confusion
an actual false representation that will 
foreseeably result in consumers being misled
And damage** (this is why it’s helpful register!)
HISTORICAL BASIS FOR 
PASSING OFF
Formulated to protect traders against misrepresentations to 
customers
Meant to protect against damage to goodwill generated by a 
brand (not protect consumers)
Later expanded to likelihood of injury to property or goodwill by 
the misrepresentation, AJ Spalding & Bros v A W Gamage 
[1915]
Images: 
https://www.cipil.law.cam.ac.uk/virtual-museum/g-spalding-and-brot
hers-v-w-gamage-ltd-and-benetfink-and-co-1915-32-rpc-273-1915-lj
 
Misrepresentation/goodwill/damage (the ‘classical 
formulation’)
MODERN ELEMENTS
1) misrepresentation;
2) made by a trader in course of trade;
3) to prospective customers or to ultimate consumers; 
4) calculated to injure the business or goodwill of another trader (not 
necessarily deceitful); and
5) which causes actual damage to business or goodwill (OR will probably do 
so).
Much broader than the historical formulation.
Lord Diplock, Erven Warnink B.V. v J. Townend & Sons (Hull) Ltd [1979] AC 731 
(Advocaat case)
APPLYING PASSING OFF
Including, not limited to… 
 Imitating the appearance of the claimant’s goods
  False advertising
  Character merchandising
  Using the claimant’s name or trade mark
GOODWILL
‘…the attractive force that brings in customers’ (AJ Spalding)
Local to each market
Damage (or likely damage) must be more than trivial
DAMAGE
Proof of actual damage not necessary (though preferred); so no need to 
show any member of the public was actually deceived
The damage is the calculated, false misrepresentation performed, likely to 
cause confusion to the consumer public (foreseeability).
DEMONSTRATING 
CONSUMER 
CONFUSION/DAMAGE TO 
GOODWILL
If we need to prove likelihood of damage to goodwill…
No individual actual damage must be proved.
But the likelihood may be proved/rebutted by:
Blogs indicating confusion or clarity;
Price difference;
Logo distinctions;
Representative cross section (focus groups);
MOROCCANOIL ISRAEL LTD V ALDI 
STORES LTD [2014] EWHC 1686
MOROCCANOIL ISRAEL LTD V ALDI 
STORES LTD [2014] EWHC 1686
Goodwill?
Misrepresentation?
Damage? (likelihood or actual confusion resulting in goodwill damage)
"In this case that means whether the public would assume, because of the get-up and name of 
Miracle Oil, that it either (a) is Moroccanoil or (b) is made by the same manufacturer (or is 
licensed).  This is to be distinguished from the public merely wondering whether the products 
are the same, or are made by the same manufacturer or are licensed…sufÏcient individuals 
have made or will make the false assumption such as to cause material damage to the 
goodwill of the claimant.“
Unsuccessful passing off
J BOLLINGER V COSTA 
BRAVA WINE [1961] 1 WLR 
277
‘Champagne’ as a description was a part of the developed goodwill AND of 
property. 
Traders producing champagne in the region had a right to be protected from 
the use of the name that might damage their goodwill and reputation.
‘Spanish Champagne’ did cause actual confusion; consumers believed it 
originated from vineyards in the Champagne region in France.  C successful in 
passing off claim.
NOTE: In recent years you will find ‘Californian Champagne’, a subject of much 
contention and legal wrangling. 
ERVEN WARNINK BV V J 
TOWNEND & SONS (HULL) 
LTD [1979] (ADVOCAAT 
CASE)
Dutch company selling alcoholic egg-based drinks in 
the English market
English company began selling a version of the Dutch 
Advocaat as ‘Old English Advocaat’
Found 1) misrepresentation; 2) made by a trader in 
course of trade; 3) to prospective customers or to 
ultimate consumers; 4) calculated to injure the 
business or goodwill of another trader (not necessarily 
deceitful); and 5) which causes actual damage to 
business or goodwill (OR will probably do so).
"Advocaat test” of acquiring a reputation as a "drink 
with recognisable qualities of appearance, taste, 
strength and satisfaction".
 “extended passing off” – not just the brand, but the 
class -  implications for fair competition?
Img: ‘What I did on my winter holiday’ – M. Blakely (2025)
DIAGEO V INTERCONTINENTAL BRANDS 
[2010] EWHC 17 (VODKAT CASE) [PSA – NOT VODKA]
DIAGEO V 
INTERCONTINENTAL 
BRANDS [2010] EWHC 17 
(VODKAT CASE)
 vodka must contain at least 37.5 proof under EU regulations (Vodkat is 22%)
"Advocaat test” of acquiring a reputation as a "drink with recognisable qualities 
of appearance, taste, strength and satisfaction".
Reached trial in December 2009, after being sold for 4 years, 13 million bottles.
Delay:  if the packaging were confusing, would it have been seen during that 
time?
Keep in mind other vodka ‘drinks’
 "likely to erode the distinctiveness of the term vodka”; vodka is a clearly 
defined class and quality of goods; passing off successful.
NEW DECISION: 
THATCHERS V ALDI [2024] 
EWHC 88 (IPEC)
Brought in the Intellectual Property 
Enterprise Court (IPEC) 
Thatchers Cloudy Lemon Cider product: 
3489711, registered in respect of “Cider; 
Alcoholic beverages, except beer” 
Aldi’s Taurus Cloudy Lemon Cider product
Used product as ‘benchmark’ but denied 
TM infringement, claimed passing off 
elements not met
Judgment for Aldi, all claims dismissed 
on:
Elements were dissimilar or not distinctive
No consumer confusion
No detriment (based on taste test!)
NEW DECISION: THATCHERS V ALDI [2025] 
EWCA CIV 5 
On appeal: Only the s 10(3) TMA Infringement claim: 
‘where the trade mark has a reputation in the United Kingdom and the use of the sign, being without due 
cause, takes unfair advantage of, or is detrimental to, the distinctive character or the repute of the trade 
mark.’
Aldi submits Taurus is meant to be ‘like Thatchers only cheaper’ but denies this meets TM infringement 
taking unfair advantage of the TM or caused detriment.
Court only considers 2 of 9 TM factors: 
(a) it must give rise to a link in the mind of the consumer and (b) give rise to injury, namely unfair 
advantage or detriment to the repute of the trade mark.
Note the primary importance of consumer social media comments as evidence of link between 
products AND Aldi’s focus on enforcing this link to unfair advantage.  Brands still must focus on their 
own merits.
CoA finds infringement in favour of the appellant, Thatchers.
There is similarity, link and detriment.
Defences all refused: lack of distinction, not honest and fair competition, and CoA refused to depart 
from previous law on unfair advantage in this area. [interesting suggestions if you are interested in 
competition law]
IT’S CRUCIAL TO REGISTER.
WHY NOT APPEAL 
PASSING OFF? 
10(3) is on unfair advantage and 
detriment; they did not pursue 
appeal on the similarity of marks and 
misleading consumers [10(2)] or 
passing off.
an actual false representation that will 
foreseeably result in consumers being 
misled
And damage
(images from judgment)
DEFENCES/REMEDIES
No notable defences beyond general defences (although consent is a 
frequent defence raised).
Remedies:
Injunction
Damages 
For loss of reputation, expansion, dilution, loss of income by customer diversion
Equity 
Some division of profits
CONCLUSION
Protect goodwill of a trader from misrepresentation and prevent consumer 
confusion (like TM)
Elements:
Goodwill enjoyed by a brand
Actual false misrepresentation
Foreseeably result
In misleading, resulting in consumer confusion
Note: deceitful intent not required!
