LAW OF TORT
Psychiatric Injury 
(2)
LAW OF TORT
Topics outline
1. The general exclusionary rule
2. Primary v secondary victims
3. Requirements for primary victims
4. Requirements for secondary victims
5. Employees
6. Summary and critique
LAW OF TORT
4. Requirements for 
Secondary Victims (cont.)
LAW OF TORT
The requirements
A. Recognised psychiatric illness
B. Foreseeable psychiatric illness in a person of ordinary 
fortitude
C. Resulting from an accident 
D. The 3 elements of proximity: 
i.
Close ties of love and aﬀection
ii.
Proximity in time and space to the accident or its aftermath
iii. Sight or hearing of the accident or its aftermath
LAW OF TORT
D. The three elements of 
proximity
“[Alcock] established that a person who suﬀers reasonably 
foreseeable psychiatric illness as a result of another person's 
death or injury cannot recover damages unless he can satisfy 
three requirements: (i) that he had a close tie of love and 
aﬀection with the person killed, injured or imperilled; (ii) 
that he was close to the incident in time and space; (iii) that 
he directly perceived the incident rather than, for example, 
hearing about it from a third person.”
(White v CC of S Yorks [1999] 1 All ER 1, Lord Steyn, p.496)
LAW OF TORT
D(i) Close ties of love 
and aﬀection
Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] 1 AC 388 
Brothers were not close enough, on the facts.
Parents and ﬁancé were close enough.
“Whether the degree of love and aﬀection in any given relationship, be it 
that of relative or friend, is such that the defendant … should reasonably 
have foreseen the shock-induced psychiatric illness, has to be decided on a 
case by case basis.” (Lord Ackner, p.404)
“I think it suﬃcient that reasonable foreseeability should be the guide. I 
would not seek to limit the class by reference to particular relationships 
such as husband and wife or parent and child. The kinds of relationship 
which may involve close ties of love and aﬀection are numerous …” (Lord 
Keith, p.397)
LAW OF TORT
D(ii + iii) Proximity in 
time and space + sight or 
hearing
McLoughlin v O’Brian [1943] AC 92
Facts:
C’s husband and children were in a car accident, in which one daughter was 
killed.
She arrived at the hospital just over 1 hour later, and found her remaining 
family bruised and covered in grime – in the same condition as they would 
have been had she found them at the scene of the accident. 
C developed psychiatric illness.
Held:
D owed C a DoC. Although C was not proximate to the accident itself, she did 
witness its ‘immediate aftermath’.
LAW OF TORT
D(ii + iii) Proximity in 
time and space + sight or 
hearing
Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] 1 AC 388
“The necessary element of proximity between plaintiﬀ and 
defendant is furnished, at least in part, by both physical and 
temporal propinquity and also by the sudden and direct visual 
impression on the plaintiﬀs mind of actually witnessing the event 
or its immediate aftermath. To use Lord Wilberforce's words in 
McLoughlin's case [1983] 1 A.C. 410, 422-423: ‘As regards 
proximity to the accident, it is obvious that this must be close in 
both time and space. . . . The shock must come through sight or 
hearing of the event or of its immediate aftermath.’” 
(Lord Oliver, p.416)
LAW OF TORT
D(ii + iii) Proximity in 
time and space + sight or 
hearing
Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] 1 AC 388
Although the parents and the ﬁancé had close ties of love and 
aﬀection, their claims still failed because they only saw the 
events on TV.
“the televised images seen by the various plaintiﬀs cannot be 
equiparated with ‘sight or hearing of the event.’ … [T]he shock 
in each case arose not from the original impact of the 
transmitted image which did not, as has been pointed out, 
depict the suﬀering of recognisable individuals.” (Lord Oliver, 
p.417)
LAW OF TORT
D(ii + iii) Proximity in 
time and space + sight or 
hearing
C must see the shocking event itself (or its immediate aftermath), 
rather than being told about it or seeing the ‘general scene’
“simultaneous broadcasts of a disaster cannot in all cases be ruled out 
as providing the equivalent of the actual sight or hearing of the event or 
its immediate aftermath … situations could be imagined where the 
impact of the simultaneous television pictures would be as great, if not 
greater, than the actual sight of the accident.” (Lord Ackner, Alcock, 
p.405)
Taylor v Somerset [1993] 4 Med. L.R. 34 – Being told of death and seeing 
a body later is not the same as seeing the accident or its immediate 
aftermath – no DoC
LAW OF TORT
5. Employees
LAW OF TORT
The requirements
A. Foreseeable psychiatric illness
B. Relationship of employment
C. Psychiatric illness results from stress at work rather than 
from witnessing the injury of another
LAW OF TORT
White v CC of S Yorks 
[1998] 2 AC 455 (aka 
Frost)
Facts:
Cs were police oﬃcers at Hillsborough disaster who helped 
rescue victims, and developed psychiatric illnesses after the 
event.
Held:
Cs not primary victims, nor did they meet the secondary 
victim requirements, nor did their status as employees mean 
they could recover – no DoC 
LAW OF TORT
White v CC of S Yorks 
[1998] 2 AC 455 (aka 
Frost)
There is no special rule for employees when it comes to psychiatric 
injury caused by witnessing shocking events – if they are to recover, 
then they must meet the ordinary requirements of primary or 
secondary victims.
BUT … things are diﬀerent when an employee’s psychiatric injury 
results not from witnessing shocking events, but from stress at work.
“The control mechanisms were plainly never intended to apply to all 
cases of psychiatric injury. They contemplate that the injury has been 
caused in consequence of death or injury suﬀered … by someone else.” 
(Lord Hoﬀmann, p.504)
LAW OF TORT
Hatton v Sutherland 
[2002] EWCA Civ 76
“There are … no special control mechanisms applying to claims for psychiatric 
… illness arising from the stress of doing the work which the employee is 
required to do”. (Hale LJ, [22])
“The threshold question is whether [psychiatric] harm to this particular 
employee was reasonably foreseeable … : this has two components (a) an 
injury to health (as distinct from occupational stress) which (b) is attributable 
to stress at work (as distinct from other factors)”. (Hale LJ, [43])
“Foreseeability depends upon what the employer knows (or ought reasonably 
to know) about the individual employee. … An employer is usually entitled to 
assume that the employee can withstand the normal pressures of the job 
unless he knows of some particular problem or vulnerability”. (Hale LJ, [43])
LAW OF TORT
Barber v Somerset CC 
[2004] UKHL 13
Facts:
C was a teacher who had been under a lot of stress, which was largely ignored by his 
employer.
Held:
D owed C a DoC
“the Court of Appeal failed to give adequate weight to … the fact that Mr Barber, an 
experienced and conscientious teacher, had been oﬀ work for three weeks … with no 
physical ailment or injury. His absence was certiﬁed by his doctor to be due to stress 
and depression. The senior management team should have made inquiries about his 
problems and seen what they could do to ease them … instead of brushing him oﬀ 
unsympathetically … or sympathising but simply telling him to prioritise his work”. 
(Lord Walker, [67])
LAW OF TORT
6. Summary and 
Critique
LAW OF TORT
Cheat sheet
Primary victims
A. Foreseeable 
personal injury 
(or ‘unwilling 
participant’)
B. Recognised 
psychiatric 
illness 
Employees
A. Foreseeable 
psychiatric illness
B.
Relationship of 
employment
C.
Psychiatric illness 
results from stress 
at work rather than 
from witnessing a 
shocking event
A.
Recognised 
psychiatric illness
B.
Foreseeable 
psychiatric illness in 
a person of ordinary 
fortitude
C.
Resulting from an 
accident 
D.
The 3 elements of 
proximity 
Secondary victims
LAW OF TORT
Criticism
“My Lords, the law on the recovery of compensation for pure psychiatric 
harm is a patchwork quilt of distinctions which are diﬃcult to justify. 
There are two theoretical solutions. The ﬁrst is to wipe out recovery in tort 
for pure psychiatric injury. … But that would be contrary to precedent … 
The second solution is to abolish all the special limiting rules applicable to 
psychiatric harm. … Precedent rules out this course … In my view the only 
sensible general strategy for the courts is to say thus far and no further. 
The only prudent course is to treat the pragmatic categories … as settled 
for the time being but by and large to leave any expansion or development 
in this corner of the law to Parliament. In reality there are no reﬁned 
analytical tools which will enable the courts to draw lines by way of 
compromise solution in a way which is coherent and morally defensible.”
(Lord Steyn, White, p.500)
LAW OF TORT
Criticism
“It seems to me that in this area of the law, the search for 
principle was called oﬀ in Alcock … No one can pretend 
that the existing law, which your Lordships have to accept, 
is founded upon principle.” (Lord Hoﬀmann, White, 
p.511)
“The control mechanisms now in force are those 
established in Alcock's case … These rules, being arbitrary 
in nature, are widely perceived to create unjust and 
unacceptable distinctions.”(Lord Goﬀ, White, p.487)
LAW OF TORT
Criticism
“We believe that the imposition of all three proximity 
requirements [in Alcock] is unduly restrictive, and that it is the 
last two limitations that have resulted in the most arbitrary 
decisions. … We consider that so long as special control 
mechanisms over and above foreseeability are required in order 
to limit the potential number of claimants, the most acceptable 
method of achieving this is to restrict the claimants by 
reference [only] to their connection with the immediate 
victim.” 
(Law Commission Report No. 249, para 6.10)
LAW OF TORT
Criticism
“In the context of secondary victims … the tort of negligence draws 
distinctions that are diﬃcult to defend. It is arguable that the only 
truly principled solution, which would avoid any arbitrary line 
drawing, would be to impose a duty of care where, in general terms, 
it was reasonably foreseeable that psychiatric illness would be 
caused to the secondary victim … But policy concerns … mean that 
adoption of that principled solution would constitute a radical and 
giant leap forward for the common law. For that reason, at the 
present stage of development, that solution is not a realistic option 
open to the courts.”
(Lord Burrows, Paul, [144])
