Employers’ 
Liability 
(or 
relationships 
akin to 
employment
)
Non-Delegable Duties and Vicarious 
Liability
(Independent Contractors, Dual VL and 
Summary)
Part 3/4
Week 18
Dr Sarah Gilmartin 
s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
Vicarious Liability – Independent 
Contractors 
Contract of service = employee 
Contract for services = independent contractor
Barclays Bank Plc v Various Claimants [2020] UKSC 13
•
‘Two elements have to be shown before one person can be made 
vicariously liable for the torts committed by another. The first is a 
relationship between the two persons which makes it proper for 
the law to make the one pay for the fault of the other … The 
second is the connection between that relationship and the 
tortfeasor's wrongdoing.’ per Lady Hale [1] 
•
'in business on his own account’ [28]
Nassir Kafagi v Jbw Group Ltd
[2018] EWCA Civ 1157
•
Contract one for services, but 
no vicarious liability
Ready Mixed Concrete (South 
East) Ltd v Minister of Pensions 
and National Insurance [1968] 2 
QB 497 
•
Entrepreneur Test
JXJ v The Province of Great 
Britain of the Institute of 
Brothers of the Christian Schools 
[2020] EWHC 1914
•
applied Barclays – different 
decision to Various Claimants. 
Vicarious Liability – 
Dual vicarious liability
Via Systems (Tyneside) Ltd v Thermal Transfer (Northern) Ltd and Others [2005] EWCA Civ 1151
1.
The Control Test: ‘If, on the facts of a particular case, the core question is who was entitled, and in 
theory obliged, to control the employee's relevant negligent act so as to prevent it, there will be 
some cases in which the sensible answer would be each of two “employers”. The present is such a 
case.’  per May LJ [79]
2.
The Business Integration Test: ‘what one is looking for is a situation where the employee in 
question, at any rate for relevant purposes, is so much a part of the work, business or organisation 
of both employers that it is just to make both employers answer for his negligence.’ per Rix LJ [79]
See also: Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v Coggins and GrifÏth (Liverpool) Ltd [1947] AC 1
Vicarious Liability – How the ‘New’ Tests have 
been applied (some additional cases)…
• TVZ v Manchester City Football Club Ltd [2022] 
EWHC 7 (QB) followed Blackpool FC Ltd (below) – 
sexual abuse by football coach – not employed 
by club and not akin to employment – no 
vicarious liability applying Various Claimants, 
Cox, and Barclays. 
• Blackpool Football Club Ltd v DSN [2021] EWCA 
Civ 1352 – Sexual abuse – club originally found 
vicariously liable – appeal allowed – no vicarious 
liability as did not satisfy the test in Various 
Claimants – not a relationship akin to 
employment and ‘there was a complete absence 
even of a vestigial degree of control’ by the club 
over the tortfeasor.
Vicarious Liability – How the ‘New’ Tests have 
been applied (some additional cases)…
•
Hughes v Rattan [2022] EWCA Civ 107 – dental practice – self-employed dentists within the 
practice providing negligent treatment – Question of NDD and VL – Was dentist ‘under a 
non-delegable duty of care to the claimant in respect of the treatment she received at the 
Practice[?] She was a patient of his Practice, not just in layman's language but as a matter of 
law.’ Bean LJ [68] – Dentist liable under NDD.
o N.B. ‘Although the relationship between the defendant and the Associate Dentists was 
closer to the “akin to employment” line than that between Barclays and Dr Bates, I 
consider that the Barclays test for vicarious liability is not met in the present case.’ Bean 
LJ [88] – Dentist NOT liable under VL.
•
MXX v A Secondary School [2023] EWCA Civ 996 (see slide at end of Part 2 as well re: Barry 
connection) – work experience student convicted subsequently of sexual activity with a child 
he met during his work experience placement – assault and battery took place post-work 
experience – was the school vicariously liable for the torts? No. Appeal issues:
The elements of the tort of intentional infliction of harm were present during the work 
experience (Wilkinson v Downton); AND
The relationship between T and D was one akin to employment; HOWEVER
There was not a sufÏcient close connection between the grooming and the employment 
- D not liable for grooming under tort in Wilkinson v Downton.
Revision/Consolidation of 
Knowledge
A reminder of the tests: 
NDD
•Consider D's common law and statutory duties e.g. provision of 
safe systems of work, competent employees, and adequate 
material.
•
Woodland Test:
1)
C is vulnerable
2)
Prior relationship between C and D (positive duty) 
3)
C has no control over how D chooses to control the 
obligation (whether personally, through employees, or 
through third parties)
4)
D has delegated to a third party something integral to 
their positive duty of care toward C
5)
Third party is negligent
A reminder of the tests: 
VL 1/2
•3 parties – T, D and C
•There must be a tort for D to be held vicariously liable
•Salmond Test = In the course of employment (authorised or 
unauthorised mode)
•Close Connection Test:
o is the tort so closely connected with T’s employment that it 
is fair and just to hold D vicariously liable?
o is the tort done in furtherance of D’s business?
A reminder of the tests: 
VL 2/2
•Various Claimants Test in detail:
1)
D is more likely to have the means to compensate C than the immediate 
wrongdoer, T;
2)
The tort has been committed as a result of activity being taken by the 
employee on behalf of D (who will usually be an employer);
3)
T’s activity is likely to be part of the business activity of D;
4)
D, by entrusting T to carry on the activity will have created the risk of the 
tort committed by T; and
5)
T, to a greater or lesser degree, has been under the control of D.
•Independent contractor test and dual vicarious liability tests:
o Control
o Integration
o In business on his own account
o The Entrepreneur Test
Non-Delegable Duties 
vs 
Vicarious Liability        
 1/3
'Juridically, the two routes are very different. In the case of 
vicarious liability, the human person must commit a tort. 
The liability of the corporate person is strict once a 
sufÏcient connection between the tort and the 
organisation is established. In the case of the non-
delegable duty, there is no need to find an individual tort. 
The tort is personal to the corporate entity, and requires 
fault. This tends to mean, in practice, that it relates to a 
managerial or organisational failure of some kind. In 
employer's liability this can take the form of a failure, for 
example, to provide a safe working environment.'
Simon Deakin 'Organisational Torts: Vicarious Liability Versus 
Non-Delegable Duties' (2018) Vol 77(1) Cambridge Law Journal 
15, 16
Non-Delegable Duties 
vs 
Vicarious Liability      
 2/3
Question
There is a liquid spillage on the floor at Boss’ 
factory. Boss tells an employee, Lackey, to clean up 
the spillage. Lackey fails to do so for no good 
reason. Another employee, Unlucky, slips on the 
liquid and breaks his leg.
N McBride and R Bagshaw, Tort Law, (6th edn, Pearson 2018)
Non-delegable duty or vicarious liability?
Non-Delegable Duties vs Vicarious 
Liability 3/3
Personal Liability (NDD)
Vicarious Liability
Breach of duty (common/statutory/contractual)
Employee's breach
Tort of employer not necessary (e.g. contractor)
Tort of employee
Positive Duty (special relationship)
Negative Duty (common duty of care)
Claimant must prove breach
Claimant must prove breach
Cannot delegate away personal liability (Wilson and 
Clyde Coal Co Ltd v English [1938] A.C. 57)
Employer liable where employee tort arises ‘in the 
course of employment’ meaning ‘closely connected 
with employment’ (Lister v Hesley Hall [2001] 2 WLR 
1311)
 
2 parties (Master and Claimant) or 3 parties
3 parties only (Master, Servant, Claimant)
DEFENCES & REMEDIES
Causation and Remoteness
D has taken all reasonable steps (the best defence 
is no defence) - NDD
C’s contributory negligence
Volenti non fit injuria
No close connection between T’s actions and D’s 
activities (JXJ v Institute of Brothers and Trustees of 
the Barry Congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses v 
BXB)
Damages
MCQ Practice
•Click this link: MCQ Employers' Liability Part 3 
•Or scan QR code:
Employers’ 
Liability 
(or 
relationships 
akin to 
employment
)
Non-Delegable Duties and Vicarious 
Liability
(Independent Contractors, Dual VL and 
Summary)
Part 3/4
Week 18
Dr Sarah Gilmartin 
s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
