DEFENCES
Part 1 and 2
Week 19
Lecture 37 and Lecture 
38
L A W. 2 2 4  T O R T  L A W
D R  S A R A H  G I L M A RT I N
s . g i l m a r ti n @ l a n c a s t e r. a c . u k
What is a defence?
1.
A reason why liability should not 
attach – a total defence: e.g. Self-
defence; Volenti non fit injuria; 
Illegality. 
2.
A method of denying elements of 
the 
tort 
– 
a 
total 
defence: 
e.g. Elements 
of 
negligence: 
Duty, Breach, Causation, and/or 
Remoteness.
3.
A way to mitigate the remedy – a 
partial defence/no defence: e.g. 
Contributory negligence
J Goudkamp,Tort Law Defences (Hart 
2016) 
Examples to Consider
• C, driving carefully, collides head on with D's speeding car. D was executing an overtake at the 
time of the collision and was on C's side of the road. C suffers head and neck injuries as a result of 
the collision. C was not wearing a seatbelt.
• C and D stole some tall ladders from a front garden. The ladders did not fit onto their van so C 
stood on the back of the van holding the ladders in place with one hand and holding onto the van 
with the other. D drove round a corner sharply and C fell off the van and was injured. 
• C spent the afternoon drinking with D. D suggested they take a joyride in his light aircraft. C 
helped D to prepare the plane. D was the pilot. Shortly after takeoff the aircraft crashed. D was 
killed and C was seriously injured. 
Assuming all elements of negligence are met, can D raise a defence? If so, on 
h
b
i ?
Defences
(Non-exhaustive)
General Application 
(all torts):
• Ex Turpi Causa – illegality 
defence
• Volenti Non Fit Injuria – 
consent defence
• Tortious elements not 
fulfilled
Private Nuisance:
• Locality (not relevant 
to amenity damage)
• Statutory Authority
• Natural Disaster
• Independent 
Contractors
• Prescription
• Contributory 
Negligence
Trespass Against the 
Person
• Self-Defence 
• Mistake as to a threat
• Prevention of a Crime
• Necessity
Rylands:
• Common Benefit
• Necessity
• Statutory Authority
• Natural Disaster
• Act or Omission of 
Claimant
• Act of Stranger
Public Nuisance:
• Contributory 
Negligence
Negligence
• Contributory 
Negligence
Defamation
• Truth
• Honest Comment
• Public Interest
• Innocent Dissemination
Complete Defenc
e – Illegality 
Ex turpi causa non oritur action – an action 
cannot be founded on illegal/immoral conduct or 
from a wrongful cause no action arises
“No court will lend its aid to a man who founds his 
cause of action upon an illegal or an immoral 
act.”
Holman v Johnson (1775) 98 E.R. 1120, 1121 per Lord 
Mansfield
3 types of case: 
Joint illegal enterprise cases; 
Unilateral illegality cases; and
“Sanction-shifting cases”.
Joint Illegal 
Enterprise
C & D are engaged in an illegal activity
Pitts v Hunt [1991] 1 Q.B. 24
"Where the [claimant]'s action in truth arises directly 
ex turpi causa, he is likely to fail ... Where the 
[claimant] has suffered a genuine wrong, to which 
allegedly unlawful conduct is incidental, he is likely to 
succeed ..."
per Dillon LJ at 56 citing Bingham LJ in Saunders v 
Edwards [1987] 1 W.L.R. 1116, 1134
See this case also for a discussion of Volenti
C's knowledge that D was underage, uninsured, and 
intoxicated
Delaney v Pickett [2011] EWCA Civ 
1532
Joyce v O'Brien [2013] EWCA Civ 546
Ashton v Turner [1981] Q.B. 137
Unilateral Illegality
C is engaged in an illegal activity
Vellino 
v 
CC 
of 
Manchester 
Police [2001] EWCA Civ 1249
(1) The operation of the principle arises 
where the claimant's claim is founded 
upon his own criminal or immoral act.
(2) The principle is one of public policy; it 
is not for the benefit of the defendant. 
(3) In 
the 
case 
of 
criminal 
conduct 
this has to be sufÏciently serious to merit 
the application of the principle
Revill v Newberry [1996] Q.B. 
567
•
C a burglar
•
D shot him
•
Defence of illegality failed
See this case also for a discussion of 
contributory negligence
Sanction-shifting  
C attempts to use tort law to deflect the impact of criminal 
law
 
Gray v Thames Trains Ltd and another [2009] UKHL 33
•
C convicted of manslaughter (diminished responsibility)
•
C suffered with PTSD further to earlier train crash
•
C claimed against D for losses associated with his 
conviction
•
'a claim of [this] kind undoubtedly falls foul of the ex turpi 
causa maxim since the claimant is asking the defendant to 
compensate him for the consequences of his own 
deliberate criminal act in killing [a person].’ per Lord Rodger 
[64]
Post-Gray Uncertainty?
Allen v Hounga [2014] UKSC 47 – C illegal au pair – illegality defence failed
Les Laboratoires Servier and another v Apotex Inc and Others [2015] AC 430 – 
patents and breaches - quasi criminal acts
‘The illegality defence, where it arises, arises in the public interest, irrespective of the interests or rights of the 
parties. It is because the public has its own interest in conduct giving rise to the illegality defence that the 
judge may be bound to take the point of his own motion, contrary to the ordinary principle in adversarial 
litigation...in general, although described as a defence, it is in reality a rule of judicial abstention. It means 
that rather than regulating the consequences of an illegal act (for example by restoring the parties to the 
status quo ante, in the same way as on the rescission of a contract) the courts withhold judicial remedies, 
leaving the loss to lie where it falls.’ Per Lord Sumption [23]
'The ex turpi causa principle is concerned with claims founded on acts which are contrary to the public law of 
the state and engage the public interest. The paradigm case is, as I have said, a criminal act. In addition, it is 
concerned with a limited category of acts which, while not necessarily criminal, can conveniently be described 
as “quasi-criminal” because they engage the public interest in the same way’. Per Lord Sumption [25]
Post-Gray Clarity? Patel v Mizra [2016] UKSC 42 
In assessing whether the public interest would be harmed in that way, it is 
necessary:
a) to consider the underlying purpose of the prohibition which has been 
transgressed and whether that purpose will be enhanced by denial of the 
claim, 
b) to consider any other relevant public policy on which the denial of the claim 
may have an impact and 
c) to consider whether denial of the claim would be a proportionate response 
to the illegality, bearing in mind that punishment is a matter for the criminal 
courts. 
Within that framework, various factors may be relevant…The public interest is 
best served by a principled and transparent assessment of the considerations 
id
tifi d
th
b
th
th
li
ti
f
f
l
h
bl
f
Further Clarity Post-Gray – Gray and Patel afÏrmed
Henderson v Dorset Healthcare University NHS Foundation Trust [2020] 
UKSC 43 
• C was a paranoid schizophrenic convicted of manslaughter (diminished responsibility) of 
her mother.
• D admitted negligence – knew of C’s health decline and should have returned her to their 
care – had they done so, C would not have killed her mother. 
• C sought damages against D (PTSD, loss of liberty, loss of amenity, forfeiture of her 
mother’s estate, cost of psychotherapy, and cost of care manager/support worker).
• 3 questions for the court:
1. Can Gray be distinguished?
No
2. Should the court depart from Gray?
‘the decision in Gray should be 
afÏrmed as being “Patel compliant” - it is how Patel “plays out in that particular type of 
case”. The clearly stated public policy based rules set out in Gray should be applied and 
followed in comparable cases.’ (Lord Hamblen [145])
3. Can C recover damages for any losses claimed?
No
More Clarity: Lewis-Ranwell (Respondent) v G4S Health Services (UK) Ltd and 
others (Appellants) [2026] UKSC 2
1/3
Facts:
The Respondent (a diagnosed schizophrenic) was arrested for burglary (08 February 2019) 
and released from custody the following day (09 February);
On the same day he was bailed (09 February) he committed GBH on an elderly gentleman 
and was re-arrested; 
The Respondent was assessed by mental health professionals whilst in custody and was 
released again on bail the following morning (10 February);
Later that day (10 February), the Respondent killed 3 elderly gentleman;
At trial in November 2019:

the jury found the Respondent not guilty of murder by reason of insanity;

he was detained at Broadmoor Hospital under the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964 
with restrictions under the Mental Health Act 1983.
The Respondent sought damages in this civil claim from the Appellants.
The Appellants raised the defence of illegality. 
More Clarity: Lewis-Ranwell (Respondent) v G4S Health Services (UK) Ltd and 
others (Appellants) [2026] UKSC 2
2/3
Issues on Appeal:
 In circumstances where the claimant was charged with murder and found not 
guilty by reason     of insanity:
1. Is the defence of illegality engaged by his civil claim in negligence?
2. If so, does it bar the claimant’s claim in whole or in part? 
Some Key Considerations:

The question is whether conduct is unlawful in the sense required for the 
application of the principle.

The actions of the claimant do not have to carry criminal responsibility to cross 
the threshold for the defence of illegality.
More Clarity: Lewis-Ranwell (Respondent) v G4S Health Services (UK) Ltd and 
others (Appellants) [2026] UKSC 2
3/3
On the facts
 Gray…involved criminal offences. By contrast the present case does not involve criminal 
offences in that the claimant was found not guilty by reason of insanity. That should not be a 
decisive consideration however.
 We do not accept that the lack of any criminal responsibility in this case is a good reason for 
distinguishing…Gray…
 We therefore conclude that the claimant’s killing of the three men is unlawful conduct for the 
purpose of engaging the illegality defence.
Applying Patel
 in cases such as the present the application of the Patel criteria leads inevitably in our view 
to the conclusion that the illegality defence applies.
 …the decision in Gray was based on policy considerations and was apparently approved in 
Patel. If one were to analyse the heads of claim in the present case in terms of the narrower or 
wider rules identified by Lord Hoffmann in Gray, every head of claim would fail under one or 
other or both of those rules.
We also consider that the conclusion to which we have come on the application of the Patel 
approach is entirely consistent with the decision and reasoning in Henderson which was itself 
decided on this basis.
A
l All
d
Complete Defence - Volenti
• Voluntary assumption of risk
• We are looking for 2 elements: 
o the C knew of the risk of injury; and 
o the C voluntarily agreed to incur this 
risk. 
Agreement/Consent?
Nettleship v Weston [1971] 2 Q.B. 691, 701 per Lord Denning MR
‘Knowledge of the risk of injury is not enough. Nor is a willingness to take the risk of 
injury. Nothing will sufÏce short of an agreement to waive any claim for negligence. 
The [claimant] must agree, expressly or impliedly, to waive any claim for any injury 
that may befall him due to the lack of reasonable care by the defendant’.
Levels of Consent?
Dann v Hamilton [1939] 1 K.B. 509
• C was a passenger in D’s car
• D had been drinking
• Another passenger said to C “You..have more pluck than I have.”
• C answered “You should be like me. If anything is going to happen, it will happen.” 
Jokingly?
• Car crashed due to D’s negligence
• ‘There may be cases in which the drunkenness of the driver at the material time is so 
extreme and so glaring that to accept a lift from him is like engaging in an intrinsically 
and obviously dangerous occupation, intermeddling with an unexploded bomb or 
walking on the edge of an unfenced cliff. It is not necessary to decide whether in such a 
case the maxim "volenti non fit injuria“ would apply, for in the present case I find as a 
fact that the driver's degree of intoxication fell short of this degree. I therefore conclude 
S 149, Road TrafÏc Act 1988
(1) This section applies where a person uses a motor vehicle in circumstances such that 
under section 143 of this Act there is required to be in force in relation to his use of it 
such a policy of insurance...
(2) If any other person is carried in or upon the vehicle while the user is so using it, any 
antecedent agreement or understanding between them (whether intended to be legally 
binding or not) shall be of no effect so far as it purports or might be held—
(a) to negative or restrict any such liability of the user in respect of persons 
carried in or 
upon the vehicle as is required by section 145 of this Act to be covered 
by a policy of 
insurance, or
(b) to impose any conditions with respect to the enforcement of any such 
liability of the 
user.
(3) The fact that a person so carried has willingly accepted as his the risk of negligence 
on the part of the user shall not be treated as negativing any such liability of the user. 
Other modes of transport?
Morris v Murray [1991] 2 Q.B. 6
• C admitted to drinking heavily with D
• D was a pilot and suggested a flight
• C helped to start the propeller and fuelled the plane
• ‘If the [C] had himself been sober on the afternoon of the flight it seems to me that, by 
agreeing to be flown by [D], he must be taken to have accepted fully the risk of serious 
injury. The danger was both obvious and great. He could not possibly have supposed that 
[D] who had been drinking all the afternoon, was capable of discharging a normal duty of 
care. But as he himself had been drinking, can it be assumed that he was capable of 
appreciating the risks?...I think he knew what he was doing and was capable of 
appreciating the risks. I do not overlook that the [C’]s evidence was that, if he had been 
sober, he would not have gone on the flight. That is no doubt so but it does not establish 
that he was in fact incapable of understanding what he was doing that afternoon. If he 
was capable of understanding what he was doing, then the fact is that he knowingly and 
willingly embarked on a flight with a drunken pilot ’ per Fox LJ at 16
Partial Defence? - Contributory 
Negligence
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945
S 1. Apportionment of liability in case of contributory 
negligence.
(1) Where any person suffers damage as the result partly of his 
own fault and partly of the fault of any other person or persons, a 
claim in respect of that damage shall not be defeated by reason of 
the fault of the person suffering the damage, but the damages 
recoverable in respect thereof shall be reduced to such extent as 
the court thinks just and equitable having regard to the 
claimant’s share in the responsibility for the damage...
(2) Where damages are recoverable by any person by virtue of the 
foregoing subsection subject to such reduction as is therein 
mentioned the court shall find and record the total damages which
S 4. Interpretation
• damage” includes loss 
of 
life 
and 
personal 
injury;
• “fault” 
means 
negligence, breach of 
statutory duty or other 
act or omission which 
gives rise to a liability 
in tort or would, apart 
from this Act, give rise 
to 
the 
defence 
of 
contributory 
negligence.
2. Did the Claimant’s actions contribute 
to the damage the Claimant suffered?
 Lertora v Finzi  [1973] RTR 161
 Jones [1952]
 St George v Home OfÏce [2008] EWCA 
Civ 1068
3. By what extent should the Claimant’s 
damages be reduced?
a) Relative blameworthiness of the parties
b) Causal potency of the parties respective 
acts
Stapley v Gypsum Mines LD [1953] AC
1. Has the Claimant exercised reasonable care?
 Jones v Livox Quarries Ltd [1952] 2 QB 608, 615 per Lord Denning: ‘A person is guilty of 
contributory negligence if he ought reasonably to have foreseen that, if he did not act as a 
reasonable, prudent man, he might hurt himself; and in his reckonings, he must take into account 
the possibility of others being careless.’
 Gough v Thorne [1966] 1 WLR 1387 
Questions to 
Ask
How does a finding of CN work?
1. Judge identifies the degree to which each party is responsible for the 
Claimant’s loss expressed as a percentage
2. The percentages always add up to 100%
3. Claimant’s damages are then reduced by the percentage allocated to 
him/her.
For example: If the Claimant and Defendant are responsible for the 
Claimant’s loss 40/60, then the Claimant’s damages will be reduced by 40%.
Defence (Partial?)/Action on 
Liability/Mitigation
Smith v Finch [2009] EWCH 53
•
C (cyclist) claims against D (biker)
•
And D claims against C
•
C suffered serious head injuries (no helmet)
•
D suffered a broken arm
•
Court said on balance D entirely at fault for accident
•
Should C’s damages be reduced for contributory negligence?
•
Highway Code, Rule 59: ‘You should wear a cycle helmet that conforms to current 
regulations, is the correct size and securely fastened. Evidence suggests that a 
correctly fitted helmet will reduce your risk of sustaining a head injury in certain 
circumstances.’ NOT LAW!
•
Medical evidence – wearing of a helmet would have made no difference to C’s injuries
•
C was not contributory negligent
Defence (Partial?)/Action on 
Liability/Mitigation
Froom v Butcher [1976] QB 286
•
C and D two drivers involved in an RTA
•
D liable in negligence
•
C suffered numerous injuries including head and chest injuries
•
C was not wearing his seatbelt
•
D alleged contributory negligence
•
Head and chest injuries were attributable to failure to wear a seatbelt
•
C contributory negligent for those injuries at 20%
•
Generally: 

Wearing of seatbelt would prevent the injury – 25% CN

Wearing of a seatbelt would reduce severity of injury – 15% CN
Intoxicatio
n
Campbell v Advantage Insurance 
Company Ltd [2021] EWCA Civ 1698 
Car accident
• C (passenger) and D (driver) intoxicated
• C not wearing seatbelt (made no 
difference to the outcome)
• C sustained traumatic brain injury and D 
was killed
• Was C at fault for getting into a car with 
D who they knew was intoxicated?
• Could the C’s own intoxication avoid a 
finding of contributory negligence?
• Reasonable man test applied to 
contributory negligence
• C was 20% contributory negligent
Self-Harm
Reeves v Commissioner of Police of the 
Metropolis [2000] 1 AC 360
• Suicide in police custody
• Duty of care
• 50/50 liability split
Corr v IBC Vehicles Ltd [2008] 1 AC 884
• PTSD following accident at work
• A question of causation and foreseeability
• No contributory negligence
N.B. 
Alliance 
& 
Leicester 
Building 
Society v Edgestop Ltd [1993] 1 WLR 
1462 – CN does not apply to intentional 
torts
Examples to 
Consider
Assuming all elements of negligence are met, 
can D raise a defence? If so, on what basis?
• C, driving carefully, collides with D's speeding car. D was executing an overtake at the time of the 
collision and was on C's side of the road. C suffers head and neck injuries as a result of the 
collision.  C was not wearing a seatbelt. 
• C and D stole some tall ladders from a front garden. The ladders did not fit onto their van so C 
stood on the back of the van holding the ladders in place with one hand and holding onto the van 
with the other. D drove round a corner sharply and C fell off the van and was injured. 
• C spent the afternoon drinking with D. D suggested they take a joyride in his light aircraft. C 
helped D to prepare the plane. D was the pilot. Shortly after takeoff the aircraft crashed. D was 
killed and C was seriously injured. 
Revision
Defence: Ex turpi causa non oritur action
i.
The defence of illegality must be pleaded 
and proved by the D on the balance of 
probabilities… 
ii. Illegality is concerned with illegal conduct 
and is of potential application in cases 
involving criminal acts and quasi-criminal 
acts featuring corruption or dishonesty…
iii. If the C has a complete defence to criminal 
liability, the illegality defence is unlikely to 
apply…
iv. The offending must be 
contemporaneous: if the C withdraws 
from a criminal enterprise before 
suffering damage, the defence will be 
inapplicable… 
v.
The C’s offending must be related 
causally to her damage…
vi. Not every breach of the criminal law 
or quasi-criminal law and not every 
act of gross immorality is sufÏcient to 
trigger the defence.
Christian Witting Street on Torts (16th edn 
OUP 2021), 215-16
Revision
Defence: Volenti non fit injuria
• C knew of the risk of injury; and
• C voluntarily agreed to take that risk.
Defence: Contributory Negligence
• Has C exercised reasonable care?
• Did C's actions contribute to the damage C 
suffered?
• By what extent should C's damages be reduced?
o Relative fault of parties
o Causal potency of parties respective acts
Additional Reading
• E Lim, ‘Ex Turpi Causa: Reformation not Revolution’ (2017) 80(5) Modern Law Review 927-
941
• JC Fisher, ‘The ex turpi causa principle in Hounga and Servier’ (2015) 78(5) Modern Law 
Review 854-870
• J Gardner, ‘Rethinking risk-taking: the death of volenti?’ (2023) Cambridge Law Journal 1-
28
• J Goudkamp and D Nolan, 'Contributory Negligence in the Twenty-First Century: An 
Empirical Study of First Instance Decisions' (2016) 79(4) Modern Law Review 575-62
• J Dietrich and I Field, ‘The “reasonable tort victim”: Contributory negligence, standard 
of care and the “equivalence theory”’ (2018) 41(2) Melbourne University Law Review 602-
646
Law.224
Tort 
DEFENCES
Part 1 and 2
Week 19
Lecture 37 and Lecture 38
Dr Sarah Gilmartin
s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
