The Rule in 
Rylands v Fletcher
Week 16
Lecture 31 (Part B)
Dr Sarah Gilmartin 
s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
Rylands v Fletcher 
(1868) LR 3 HL 330
The facts of the case:
• In 1860 D hired contractors to create a reservoir on his land to provide water for 
a mill; 
• D had no further involvement in the actual construction;
• Old mine shafts ran under the land, unbeknownst to the D or the contractors;
• The old mine shafts ran under the D’s land and the C’s land;
• The hole was dug causing the mine shafts to be loosely filled with soil and D’s 
contractors built the reservoir;
• After the reservoir was filled, the water burst through the shafts and flooded C’s 
property, causing £937 worth of damage;
• C noted the flooding and installed a pump, but the pump burst, causing more 
flooding; 
• An inspector called in to investigate the source of the flooding then discovered 
the connection in the mine shafts and source; and
The Issue 
      
   The 
Rule
Can a Defendant be held 
liable for indirect damage 
to a neighbour’s property in 
the absence of any 
negligent act?
A Defendant can be held liable for 
indirect damage to a neighbour’s 
land in the absence of negligence 
when:
• The ‘thing’ was 
brought/accumulated on the 
property;
• Escape would be 
mischievous/dangerous; and
• Use was non-natural.
A useful quote from Rylands 
“We think that the true rule of law is, that the person who for his own purposes 
brings on his lands and collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it 
escapes, must keep it in at his peril, and, if he does not do so, is prima facie 
answerable for all the damage which is the natural consequence of its escape...
 ... The person whose grass or corn is eaten down by the escaping cattle of his 
neighbour, or whose mine is flooded by the water from his neighbour's reservoir, or 
whose cellar is invaded by the filth of his neighbour's privy, or whose habitation is 
made unhealthy by the fumes and noisome vapours of his neighbour's alkali works, 
is damnified without any fault of his own; and it seems but reasonable and just that 
the neighbour who has brought something on his own property (which was not 
naturally there), harmless to others so long as it is confined to his own property, but 
which he knows will be mischievous if it gets on his neighbour's, should be obliged 
to make good the damage which ensues if he does not succeed in confining it to his 
own property. But for his act in bringing it there no mischief could have accrued, and 
it seems but just that he should at his peril keep it there, so that no mischief may 
accrue, or answer for the natural and anticipated consequence.” 
Per Blackburn J
New Law or 
Development of 
Existing Law?
• Vaughan v Menlove 
(1837)132 E.R. 490
• “As the case of Smith v. 
Kenrick [(1849) 137 E.R. 205] 
is an illustration of the first 
principle to which I have 
referred, so also the second 
principle to which I have referred 
is well illustrated by another case 
in the same Court, the case of 
Baird v. Williamson [(1863) 
143 E.R. 831]...My Lords, these 
simple principles, if they are well 
founded, as it appears to me 
Rylands 
Summary/Checklist
1) D must be occupier of the land;
2) D must bring/collect/keep an exceptionally dangerous or mischievous 
thing on the land;
3) D must have or should have recognised (reasonable/objective 
standard) an exceptionally high risk of danger or mischief in the event 
of an escape,  no matter how small/unlikely the risk (so 
foreseeability of harm – not too remote);
4) D’s use of land must be non-natural/unusual;
5) The thing does escape onto another property; and
6) Escape must cause legally recognised damage (property or amenity). 
7) Limited defences are available.
N.B. 
•
 there is no recovery for death or personal injury; and
•
 it is not necessary to establish negligence.
Standing
Standing to claim:
 Historically no proprietary interest required; BUT
 Post-Transco a proprietary interest is needed (so
now closer to private nuisance).
Defendant’s interest in land:
 D must own or control the land.
 A landlord might be liable if authorisation given for the accumulation.
Accumulation: 
D must bring/collect/keep an exceptionally dangerous or 
mischievous thing on the land – The “Rylands Object”
 
D 
must 
accumulate 
the 
“Rylands Object”, for their own 
purposes (so no agreement or 
benefit to the C).
 Spontaneous accumulations 
(eg rainwater, birds) would not 
therefore give rise to liability.
 
The 
accumulation 
of 
something 
dangerous/mischievous 
is 
related to non-natural use
Examples of “Rylands Object” likely to 
cause mischief if they escape:
•
Water
•
Animals
•
Electricity
•
Fumes
•
Gas
•
Vibrations
•
Poisonous plants
•
Fire* 
•
Fireworks
* Sometimes volume, not type eg: 1 
matchbox v 5,000 matchboxes;  a birdbath 
i
Escape:
A risk of escape and the mischievous or dangerous thing does escape onto another 
property
Read v Lyons [1947] A.C. 156. 
 C worked in a munitions factory 
and was injured by the explosion of 
a shell.
 It was accepted that an explosive 
shell is a dangerous thing.
 No liability as D was not negligent, 
and there was no ‘escape’.
 “...escape from a place where the 
D has occupation or control over 
land to a place which is outside his 
occupation or control.” per 
 The “Rylands Object” must 
escape 
Gore v Stannard [2012] EWCA Civ 
1248
 No-fault electrical fire ignited tyres 
at a tyre factory.
 Fire spread to C’s property causing 
damage.
 No liability under Rylands 
because:
what escaped was the fire, not the 
tyres;
use of land was not non-natural; 
and 
Foreseeability:
D must have or should have recognised (reasonable/objective standard) an exceptionally high risk of 
danger or mischief in the event of an escape,  no matter how small/unlikely the risk (so foreseeability 
of harm – not too remote)
Cambridge Water Co. v Eastern Counties Leather Plc 
[1994] 2 A.C. 264
 Damage of the relevant type in the event of an escape
Likelihood of escape is not a factor (just the type of damage that 
would occur in the event it happens)
In the case of limitation of scientific knowledge, Rylands would 
Cambridge Water Co. v Eastern 
Counties Leather Plc [1994] 2 A.C. 264 
1/2
 C purchased a borehole to test water for potability 
and found it to be contaminated with PCE;
 Contamination was traced to D, where chemicals 
had seeped through a tannery factory floor and 
reached the water supply (and had been for some 
time);
 No evidence of spills or leaks – must have 
occurred from the old system;
 Borehole could no longer be used since drinking 
water was unsafe.
 Claim brought under negligence, nuisance, and 
Rylands.
 Storage of large quantities of chemicals an almost 
classic case of non-natural use; per Lord Goff 
[though obiter] 
Cambridge Water Co. v Eastern 
Counties Leather Plc [1994] 2 A.C. 264 
2/2
 No liability as the damage was too remote
 No knowledge previously that PCE was harmful in 
the past
 Not foreseeable that this type of escape could 
result in this type of damage.
 Foreseeability had been ‘intended’ a part of the 
rule…the D is “prima facie answerable for all the 
damage which is the natural consequence of its 
escape.” Rylands

Non-natural use:
D’s use of land must be non-natural/unusual
"[Non-natural use] is not a test to be 
inflexibly applied. A use may be 
extraordinary and unusual at one time 
or in one place but not so at another 
time or in another place...I also doubt 
whether a test of reasonable use is 
helpful, since a use may well be quite 
out of the ordinary but not 
unreasonable.” (Transco v Stockport 
MBC [2004] 2 A.C. 1 per Lord Bingham 
at [11])
‘It must be some special use bringing 
with it increased danger to others and 
must not merely be the ordinary use of 
the land or such a use as is proper for 
the general benefit of the community ”
 What about when circumstances 
change?
 “All the circumstances of time and 
practice of mankind must be taken 
into consideration so that what 
may be regarded as dangerous or 
non-natural may vary according to 
the circumstances.” (Read v Lyons 
[1947] A.C. 156 per Lord Porter at 
176)
 Eg, in 1919, keeping a motor 
vehicle full of petrol in a garage 
was considered a non-natural use 
(Musgrove v Pandelis [1919] 2 K.B. 
43)
Transco Plc v Stockport 
Metropolitan Borough Council 
[2003] UKHL 61 1/2
‘Non-natural’ use of land:
 D (council) was responsible for maintaining utility pipes 
supplying flats;
 A large water main burst, causing serious flooding of 
the embankment, which the C's high pressure gas main 
ran under;
 The waterlogged embankment collapsed, leaving the 
gas main unsupported and exposed; and
 C brought a claim for emergency remedial measures.
 Are sizeable gas and water mains ‘non-natural 
use’?
 No liability as this is not a non-natural use;
 ‘Extraordinary and unusual use required’ per Lord 
Bingham 
Transco Plc v Stockport 
Metropolitan Borough Council 
[2003] UKHL 61 2/2
The personal injury issue
 “In some cases in the first half of the 20th century plaintiffs 
recovered damages under the rule for personal injury... [eg] 
Hale v Jennings Bros [1938] 1 All ER 579...But dicta in Read v J 
Lyons & Co Ltd cast doubt upon whether the rule protected 
anything beyond interests in land. Lord Macmillan (at pp 170-
171) was clear that it had no application to personal injury and 
Lord Simonds (at p 180) was doubtful. But I think that the 
point is now settled by two recent decisions of the House of 
Lords: Cambridge Water Co v Eastern Counties Leather plc 
[1994] AC 264, which decided that Rylands v Fletcher is a 
special form of nuisance and Hunter v Canary Wharf Ltd 
[1997] AC 655, which decided that nuisance is a tort against 
land. It must, I think, follow that damages for personal injuries 
are not recoverable under the rule.” per Lord Bingham at [35].
N.B. Christian Witting 
points out that these 
decisions have been 
made in dicta, but the 
rule seems settled.
Defences
 Consent (express or implied)
 Common Benefit (to both C & D - 
may be redundant to consent)
 Necessity
 Natural disaster/Act of God (not 
reasonably anticipated)
 Statutory Authority 
 Default of C (act or omission of 
C)
 Act of stranger: 
No liability if harm comes from the 
unforeseeable act of a stranger
Rickards v Lothian [1913] A.C. 263: 
Unknown third party intentionally 
blocked the sink in a premises with 
multiple occupants, causing flooding 
and damage to C’s stock. Claim failed. 
Possibly limited to ‘mischievous, 
deliberate, and conscious acts of a 
stranger’ (excluding a stranger’s 
negligence), but test turns on 
absence of control.
If a stranger’s interference is 
foreseeable, no longer a defence.
Summary 
(and see following 
slides for arguments 
around 
keeping/replacing 
Rylands – what do 
you think?)
Is Rylands still relevant? 
1/4
 Extremely narrow application
 Proposal by Royal Commission in 1978 to replace the tort with a statutory 
scheme governing ‘dangerous’ activities
 Lots of statutory regulation, eg: Nuclear Installations Acts 1965 and 1969, but 
no overarching statutory scheme to deal with all type of “Rylands Objects”
 Others have argued that Rylands should be subsumed into tort of negligence 
and/or nuisance – Australia has followed this approach
 House of Lords in Transco, (see in particular Lord Bingham’s judgment), said 
there is still a place for Rylands
Argument A: Statutory
2/4
 A statute would give greater certainty (but countering that – could a statute 
cover all possible types of “Rylands Objects”?)
 Rylands should be abolished rather than be retained for ‘back up’ (Pearson 
Commission)
 Imposing strict liability should primarily be reserved for Parliament
 Statutory intervention is most appropriate for dealing with hazardous or 
inherently dangerous uses of land
Argument B: Negligence or 
Nuisance
3/4
 Rylands is a type of sub-nuisance claim 
and/or has been subsumed into negligence.
 “The result of the development of the 
modern law of negligence has been that 
ordinary negligence has encompassed and 
overlain the territory in which the rule in 
Rylands v Fletcher operates.  Any case in 
which an owner or occupier brings onto 
premises or collects or keeps a ‘dangerous 
substance’ in the course of non-natural use 
of the land will inevitably fall within a 
category of case in which a relationship of 
proximity under ordinary negligence 
principles will exist between owner and 
occupier and someone whose person or 
property is at risk of physical injury or 
damage in the event of the ‘escape’ of the 
Counterpoint:
Different foci: Historically, Rylands 
had no requirement for proprietary 
interest.  Transco has narrowed the 
approach more similarly to nuisance.
Non-natural v Reasonableness: non-
natural use is a required element for 
Rylands; reasonable use (or common 
and ordinary use) is a factor for 
nuisance (Thought: But does Fearn’s 
emphasis on common and ordinary 
take us nearer to collating the torts?).
Repetition: isolated incident v 
ongoing
Other distinctions may be discerned
Argument C: Keep Rylands
4/4
 Rylands provides a limited, but important, cause of action where statutory 
remedies are not available and where no relief would be found under 
negligence.
 It is in the interest of justice to keep a common law ‘back up’ in case of lack of 
foresight or inaction in legislation.
 Rylands is flexible enough to accommodate changing circumstances and 
societal expectations.
 Rylands is an extension of nuisance, relating to isolated incidents, not 
continuing problems. 
Rylands ‘wins’ for 
now
The Rule in 
Rylands v Fletcher
End Lecture
Week 16
Lecture 31 (Part B)
Dr Sarah Gilmartin 
s.gilmartin@lancaster.ac.uk
