Birks, Peter 
 
 
In Restraint of Tort
 
pp. 83-102
Birks, Peter, (1994) The frontiers of liability, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Staff and students of Lancaster University are reminded that copyright subsists in this 
extract and the work from which it was taken. This Digital Copy has been made under 
the terms of a CLA licence which allows you to: 
access and download a copy;
•
print out a copy;
•
 
Please note that this material is for use ONLY by students registered on the course of 
study as stated in the section below. All other staff and students are only entitled to 
browse the material and should not download and/or print out a copy.
This Digital Copy and any digital or printed copy supplied to or made by you under the 
terms of this Licence are for use in connection with this Course of Study. You may retain 
such copies after the end of the course, but strictly for your own personal use.
All copies (including electronic copies) shall include this Copyright Notice and shall be 
destroyed and/or deleted if and when required by Lancaster University.
Except as provided for by copyright law, no further copying, storage or distribution 
(including by e-mail) is permitted without the consent of the copyright holder.
The author (which term includes artists and other visual creators) has moral rights in 
the work and neither staff nor students may cause, or permit, the distortion, mutilation 
or other modification of the work, or any other derogatory treatment of it, which would 
be prejudicial to the honour or reputation of the author.
Course of Study: LAW.224 - Law of Torts
Title: The frontiers of liability
Name of Author: Birks, Peter
Name of Publisher: Oxford University Press
7. In Restraint of Torti  
JANE STAPLETON 
NE approach to the task implied by the 
daunting title of this seminar is to try to 
prophesy in which areas tort liability will 
contract or atrophy and in which areas it may 
develop substantially. Another strategy, and the one 
which commends itself to me, is to examine some of 
the analytical processes by which liability issues are 
now handled with a view to suggesting how they 
may be improved so that real concerns already 
imbedded in the law may be made manifest and out-
comes may be made less anomalous than at present. 
An attempt is also made to tease out some of these 
concerns although a full exposition of them must be 
left to another time. 
1. Problems With the Position We Are Now In 
The collapse twenty years ago of confidence in tort 
law had little to do with the state of formal doctrine. 
Rather it concerned the large gap between the appar-
ent promise of tort law and its reality. The promise 
that a wide range of causes of action is available to 
all suitably aggrieved citizens was seen to be 
betrayed by the operation of non-legal barriers to 
claiming' which prevented all but a very few claims 
by those technically entitled to sue. These claims 
were almost wholly confined to one tort—that of neg-
ligence--and to the two types of defendants who 
happened to be subject to compulsory insurance 
(employers and motorists). The presence of insur-
ance behind virtually all defendants was seen as 
undermining the deterrence claims of the new eco-
nomic theorists and the corrective justice claims of 
moral defenders of tort, while resolution of the suits 
of plaintiffs was often found to hinge in practice so 
much on the vagaries of evidence that they became a 
'forensic lottery'.3 
These structural challengenet.the respectability of 
tort still exist but excite less interest nowadays, no 
doubt partly due to the recessionary times which 
force expensive reform programmes of comprehen-
sive compensation for, say, personal injuries a long 
I would like to thank Peter Cane, the participants in the 
SPTL seminar and members of the Sydney University Law 
for comments on the text of this paper. 
Of which some, including the availability of legal aid, 
have now become even more of a problem. 
3  T. Ison, The Forensic Lottery (Staples Press, London, 
1967). See also P. S. Atiyah, Accidents, Compensation and the 
Low, 1st ed. (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1970); The 
Report of the Royal Commission on Civil Liability and Corn- 
way down the political agenda. ills on other features 
of tort law that the current wave of anxiety is 
focused, namely the reach of liability and the coher-
ence of liability rules specifically in the tort of negli-
gence. 
It may seem ironic that, having learnt how irrele-
vant tort law is to most people, lawyers have become 
even more troubled by its appearance of intellectual 
incoherence and anomaly. But even if tort law 
remains in practice erratic in outcome and the pre-
serve only of the very rich or very poor plaintiff, it 
may still be important in its symbolic role as vindi-
cating certain values for society. And in that role the 
success of tort law will still depend on its appear-
ance of being fair, sensible and focused. In other 
words, even those of us who think that any 'compen-
sation for disability' goal should be pursued by no-
fault social security mechanisms and who do not see 
tort as having much more than an important sym-
bolic role in society as the law's most patent experi-
ment in 'applied morality',4 should share the current 
concern with the application and direction of some 
areas of tort doctrine. In particular, it is a useful cor-
rective for those tempted by the idea of 'money for 
everyone, regardless of everything's to investigate the 
reasons why tort should refuse a remedy to a plain-
tiff who has been injured by the defendant. 
(a) The working out of established doctrine 
A minor thread of current concern with the condi-
tion of tort is an uneasiness about the working 
through of tortious principles (usually negligence) 
into areas which previously had not produced 
claims. It is one thing to claim that a manufacturer 
must take care not to have snails in its ginger beer 
but it may seem quite another to claim that those 
involved in making goods and buildings should 
involve themselves in expensive post-supply surveil-
lance of their safety.' Such claims are now being 
made and with some success but they are not the 
only examples of the pressures the negligence idea is 
putting on the perceived ambit of tort law. We are 
pensation for Personal Injury (Cmnd 7054, 19781. 
• S. Stoljar, 'Concerning Strict Liability' in Essays on Torts, 
ed. P. Finn (Sydney. Law Book Co., 1989), 267. 
° T. Weir (19921 C.L.J. 375, 376. 
e e.g. Walton v. British Leyland, The Times, 13.7.78; Eckers-
ley & Others v. Binney & Partners (the Abbeystead pumping 
station disaster), leave to appeal refusal of House of Lords 
9.6.88, see Independent, 10.6.88. 
83 
In Restraint of Tort 
MP' 
now seeing whole new types of claim which were 
simply not considered by practitioners twenty or 
thirty years ago. For example, some victims of crime 
are now suing their assailants in tort.' More unusu-
ally, a local education authority was recently sued in 
negligence by children who had been sexually 
assaulted by a headmaster in one of its schools:" ear-
lier this year newspapers reported that people who 
believed their health was damaged in childhood by 
passive smoking have begun to take legal advice 
about suing their parents:" and just recently a man 
won legal aid to sue for 'personal injury and loss' a 
council he claims negligently failed to have him 
adopted when a child." 
Violence and accidents within families and homes 
are noticeably now giving rise to tort claims. In 
recent years appellate courts have been faced with 
claims by, for example, a woman who alleged she 
had suffered mental illness as a result of childhood 
sexual abuse by her adoptive father and rape by her 
adoptive brother:" and a claim by a person against 
her foster mother and local authority for alleged neg-
ligence in leaving her as a two-year old (1966) near a 
source of scalding hot water while the mother 
fetched a towel." 
Particularly noteworthy is the rise in the past 
twenty years in claims alleging negligent failure by 
one party to control another. Usually it is alleged 
that a third party should have been controlled: local 
authorities allegedly failing to control builders:" 
occupiers failing to control hooligans and vandals;Th 
police failing to control criminals." But in one 
extraordinary case the plaintiff was the party who, it 
was alleged, ought to have been controlled. It must 
be quite a sight to the ordinary citizen to see a man 
securing a £45,000 out-of-court settlement from the 
Trafford Health Authority on the basis that one of 
the causes of his killing his mother was the Health 
See e.g., the claims by Mesh's victims which formed the 
background to Mesh v. McCreamer No. 1 (19861 1 All ER. 943. 
Not surprisingly the phenomenon is even more widespread in 
the US where, e.g., at least 200 lawsuits have been filed by 
HIV-positive people against the person, who it is claimed, 
infected them: Independent, 18.2.93. See also the Halford v. 
Brookes litigation (The Times, 22.7.91) in which the mother of 
Lynn Siddons sued her alleged murderer for damages after the 
relevant authorities declined to prosecute. 
° P. v. Harrow London Borough Council, The Times, 
22.4.92 (the claim failed). The Catholic Church in the UK is 
currently facing similar claims with respect to sexual abuse by 
its priests: the Guardian, 24.5.93. 
‘' Independent on Sunday, 31.1.93. 
Independent on Sunday, 9.5.93. 
" Stabbings v. Webb 11993) 2 W.L.R. 120 (H.L.) (held statute 
barred). 
'2  The Independent, 27.3.91, p. 26 (the claim failed). In 1990 
a girl was awarded £35,000 damages (for burns) against a 
friend's mother who had given the 9 year olds candles to play 
with in a 4 foot square tree house: The Independent, 3.10.90. 
Authority's negligent discharge of him from 
hospital." 
The incidence of extraordinary applications of the 
negligence principle seem to be increasing. They not 
only surprise some observers but they must bewilder 
those to whom the protection of tort law is refused, 
especially when the refusal is based on grounds 
which are patently unconvincing. The parent who 
comes across her child's bloodied corpse just a little 
too late for the current rules on recovery for nervous 
shock to apply to her might wonder why the law 
rules her child's blood too dry to found an action 
while allowing the matricide to sue. 
The dilemma these cases throw up is that there is a 
lot of conduct in modern life which can be impli- 
cated in the occasioning of injury and much of this 
can plausibly be described as negligent." The pene-
tration into non-traditional areas of claims for recov-
ery in tort was an inevitable consequence of the 
formulation of negligence liability in terms of fairly 
general principle, at least so long as restraining prin-
ciples were regarded as peripheral subsidiary consid-
erations. The challenge this phenomenon clearly 
now presents is that we may not be willing to accept 
a tort system which seeks to provide compensation 
(and deterrence) in this vast array of situations." If 
not, we need to eschew that old confusing cliché that 
tort law is about compensation and loss—spreading, 
and to focus in a detailed way on those concerns 
which provide reasons for denying recovery to those 
who have admittedly been injured by the negligent 
conduct of the defendant. Only in that way will we 
be able to restrict the overall ambit of tort law to 
broadly familiar bounds without resort to artificial 
devices which appear so manifestly unjust to the 
non-lawyer. 
The nature of the concern with these cases is in 
striking contrast to the nature of the dominant con- 
Injured wife recovered £0.5m from (the household insurer of) 
husband for his failure to repair window: The Times 26/4/94. 
'2  Anna v. Merton London borough Council (19781 A.C. 728. 
" Cunningham v. Reading Football Club Ltd. (Q.B.D.) Inde-
pendent, 20.3.91. 
" Hilly. C.C. of South Yorks. (199011 All ER. 1046. 
" The Independent, 18.6.91. Compare Meah v. McCreamer 
119851 1 All ER. 367 and Mesh v. McCreamer No. 2 119861 1 
All ER. 943. 
Moreover, there is arguably also a modern tendency to 
debase the standard against which conduct is judged: without 
the benefit of hindsight would the police behaviour at Hillsbor-
ough look so self-evidently negligent? To what degree was 
admission of liability the less damaging alternative to police 
public image given that the particular circumstances of death 
in that case were so public and distressing? 
Which even Schwartz, who seems to support this view, 
concedes is 'a very large responsibility': G. Schwartz. 'The 
Beginning and the Possible End of the Rise of Modern Ameri-
can Tort Law' (1992) 26 Georgia L.R. 601, 608. 
84 
Jane Stapleton 
cern of lawyers in the area of tort. On the one hand 
these unusual claims and the anomalies they may 
present can be seen as the worrying result of the 
development and application of broad principles of 
negligence—for example, liability for failure to con- 
trol another party. Yet for lawyers the principal cur-
rent concern with the condition of tort law, again 
centering on the law of negligence, relates to the 
retreat by appellate courts from broad principle to 
timid pragmatism. McGhee is overtaken by Wilsher, 
McLoughlin by Alcock, Hedley Byrne by Caparo, and 
most famously Anns by Murphy." Dealing with this • 
complaint requires, however, the same agenda for 
future action as does the concern with the poten-
tially vast new liabilities generated by broad princi-
ples: an explicit focus on those policy concerns 
which militate against the protection by tort of every-
one who has been injured by the carelessness of the 
defendant. 
(I) The retreat to incrementalism 
The debate concerning the retreat to incrementalism 
has been focused on the duty of care in negligence. 
This is not the place to rehearse the origin of this 
retreat but it is fairly clear that it was motivated prin-
cipally by concern that recovery in negligence for 
economic loss was threatening to get out of hand. In 
the decade since Junior Books' appellate judges have 
succeeded in substantially tightening up liability in 
this area. Had this strategy been accompanied by 
careful and open explanation, no doubt much later 
criticism would have been avoided. But the intellec-
tual tactics used were unconvincing. In attacking the 
earlier broad approach to the duty question as enun-
ciated in Dorset Yacht' and Anns," the House of 
Lords focused on the open-ended and vague terms in 
which it was couched. The complaint seemed to be 
that if the analysis of duty was generalised in this 
way into some sort of simple principle or 'test' it was 
doomed to generate far too much liability in the 
hands of lower courts who needed more restraining 
guidelines. Better to eschew this 'modem' approach 
and return to an incremental approach. 
The first difficulty which emerged with the new 
" McGhee v. National Coal Board 119721 3 All E.R. 1008; 
Wilsher v. Essex Area Health Authority 119861 3 All E.R. 801; 
McLoughlin v. O'Brien 11982] 2 All E.R. 298; A/cock v. Chief 
Constable of the South Yorkshire Police 119911 4 All ER. 907; 
Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. V. Heller & Partners Ltd. [1984] A.C. 
485; Caparo Industries plc. v. Dickman [1989] 1 All ER. 798; 
Anns v. Merton London Borough Council 119781 A.G. 728; Mur-
phy',. Brentwood District Council [1990] 2 All ER. 908. 
Junior Books Ltd. v. Veitchi Co. Ltd. 119831 1 AL. 520. 
U Dorset Yacht Co. Ltd. v. Home Office [1989] 2 Q.B. 412. 
Anns V. Merton London Borough Council 119781 A.C. 728. 
" In Caparo Industries plc. v. Dickman [1989] 1 All ER. 
798. 
incremental approach was that the terms in which it 
was itself originally couched proved to be virtually 
empty concepts which gave litigants and lower courts 
no better guidance than the rejected approach as to 
the direction, if any, in which the law could legiti- 
mately develop. Not surprisingly most lower courts 
began to 'play safe', refusing the economically dam-
aged plaintiff's claim for the protection of a tort obli-
gation in novel circumstances but only being able to 
justify this result in obscure and virtually meaning-
less terms. It took most of the late 1980s and early 
1990s before terms such as 'special relationship', 'just 
and reasonable', 'voluntary assumption of responsi-
bility', 'reasonable reliance' and 'proximity' were 
finally revealed as little more than labels in which a 
court wrapped up the conclusion it had already 
reached on other (often unenunciated) grounds. 
Next, the House of Lords' attempt" to state in 
more detail analytical steps for the new incremental 
approach in a way which would prevent the genera-
tion of too much new liability by any single new 
case, revealed further problems. The lower court 
faced with a novel claim for the protection of a tort 
obligation was, in effect, told first to blinker its eyes 
so that it only considered the relevant 'pocket' of 
caselaw dealing with the relevant features of the case 
at hand. Sometimes this would be a pocket of liabil-
ity, sometimes a pocket of no liability. Yet for this to 
produce stability and coherent outcomes two fairly 
obvious conditions must be satisfied. First, it must be 
clear what it is about the new case which charac-
terises it and which indicates the relevant earlier 
caselaw 'pocket' within which it needs to be judged. 
But how are we to know this? Why is it that what is 
important about the facts of Smith v. Bush is the 
form of the defendant's carelessness (negligent pro-
fessional advice) so that it can be associated with 
earlier caselaw allowing a duty of care (Hedley 
Byrne)?" Why was not the relevant fact that the 
plaintiff suffered the economic loss through the 
acquisition of defective property so that the case 
would be placed in the D & F Estates/Murphy 
'pocket' of caselaw with the result that a duty of care 
would be denied?" 
" Smith v. Bush (19891 2 W.L.R. 790; Hedley Byrne & Co. 
Ltd. v. Heller & Partners (1964) AZ. 465. 
" D. & F. Estates Ltd. v. Church Commissioners for England 
(1988) 2 All E.R. 992; Murphy v. Brentwood District Council 
[1990] 2 All ER. 908. In general, see J. Stapleton, 'Duty of Care 
and Economic Loss: A Wider Agenda' (1991) 107 L.Q.R. 249 in 
particular the uncertainties as to whether cases such as Junior 
Books fall into the same pocket as the Hedley Byrne 'reliance' 
case (see p. 283). The facts of Lancashire and Cheshire Assoc. 
of Baptist Churches Inc. v. Howard & Seddon Partnership 
119931 3 All E.R. 487 (Q.B.D.) also seem to straddle the two 
pockets described in the text. 
85 
In Restraint of Tort 
MP. 
 
The second and associated condition which needs 
to be satisfied if the incremental approach is to pro-
duce stability and coherence using a pocket of 
caselaw as its starting point is that the boundaries of 
existing pockets, must make sense. One reason why 
the current state of the law relating to economic loss 
is so unsatisfactory and unstable is that at present 
cases are not grouped into pockets in a way which 
makes sense. The pockets overlap. As we have just 
seen, a particular fact situation could plausibly fit 
into both of two pockets enunciated by the courts, 
even though one is associated with recognition of a 
duty of care and the other with its denial. To some 
extent this has been because, in defining pockets, 
courts have often been beguiled by the superficial 
similarity of facts rather than being concerned to 
focus on what, if any, policy concern cases had in 
common. Even if the approach of starting within a 
pocket of caselaw was otherwise workable, then, 
these boundaries would have to be rethought and yet 
this would require the very sort of broad considera-
tion of principles from which the incrementalists are 
trying to distance the analysis. 
In any case, the fundamental flaw in the 'pre-
judged pockets' approach which makes it unsatisfac-
tory is that any case may have more than one factor 
which is juridically significant. The case may 
involve a local authority defendant, a problematic 
kind of loss, conduct consisting of an omission, an 
under-age plaintiff and so on. By focusing without 
explanation on only one of them—so that, for exam-
ple. the case is designated at the outset as one 'about 
negligent misstatements'—courts de-emphasize and 
run the risk of ignoring other factors to which in 
other contexts they do give considerable attention. 
Analytical method needs to be richer than this. It 
needs to consider each factor in turn—some factors 
weighing in favour of liability, and some countervail-
ing factors tilting the balance the other way. This 
needs to happen without any pre-judging of what the 
eventual point of balance might be by the characteri-
zation of the case, at the outset, as belonging to a par-
ticular set of past cases. Of course, across many fact 
situations this balancing process will produce 'pock-
ets' of like outcomes— for example there would be a 
pocket of liability for much physical damage caused 
by the direct act of a negligent defendant and a 
pocket of no-liability for the negligent omission to 
rescue a stranger—so principles would emerge on 
which practitioners could often confidently advise 
clients. But hard cases will always arise which do 
not fit smoothly into settled areas of principle. 
Indeed these are the ones most likely to be litigated. 
The flaw in the Ca pare approach is that it suggests a 
court will be able to determine at the outset of its 
analysis in these hard cases which of the existing 
clusters of cases the hard case in hand is best associ-
ated with. 
(c) What might be done 
What any court needs to consider in the duty analy-
sis are all the reasons for helping the plaintiff and all 
those against doing so: a difficult and complex bal-
ancing of the arguments 'for' and 'against'. On its 
face the Wilberforce test in Anna was simply one 
attempt to reflect this truism. There were, however, 
problems with that particular statement of the bal-
ancing process. For a start, the first limb skirts over 
the major problem for any general statement of a neg-
ligence principle, namely that there are large areas in 
which careless conduct causing injury to innocent 
parties is not actionable.'" Even if there is one strong 
general principle to be found at this stage—and I 
doubt it—its application across different types of 
plaintiff, of loss, of defendant and of form of casual 
connection" is extremely variable and complex. 
Judicial manipulation of the 'foreseeability' concept 
did not convincingly provide an understanding of 
this complexity, while the 'proximity' notion 
scarcely hinted at it. As more unconventional, 'not 
obvious'" plaintiffs bring their unusual claims to 
court the inadequate fleshing out of this first limb, of 
the 'why should the law help this plaintiff argu-
ments, begins to prove more problematic. This half 
of the equation needs attention and may prove just as 
useful in controlling the widening and dilution of 
tort principles as the more obvious role of arguments 
directly against liability in the case. 
Here, in this paper, however, I want to concentrate 
on the latter arguments. It seems widely believed 
that under the modern Wilberforce test of duty of 
care insufficient weight was given to those concerns 
which militate against extending the protection of 
tort to the plaintiff and that now in order to restore 
coherent and symbolically convincing boundaries to 
tort the balance needs to be reset by a firmer empha-
sis on these countervailing factors. To do this courts 
should abandon the strategy of searching at the out-
set for the 'relevant' pocket of caselaw and replace it 
with one focused, inter alia, on these factors. Courts 
should identify reasons why negligently caused loss 
should not be compensated (the 'countervailing 
agenda'), identify in any particular case, which of 
those reasons apply and which do not, and decide, 
4 
" Consider the negligent/intentional infliction of economic loss by successful parties on their competitors in a free market. 
" Including failure to control a third party or providing an opportunity for a negligent third party. 
" As Lord Goff described them at this Seminar. 
86 
4 
Jane Stapleton 
on balance with the pm-liability argument(s), 
whether the weight of countervailing concerns 
should lead to a denial of liability. 
Sometimes the plaintiff's claim might cause con-
cern on a number of fronts, sometimes just one, some- 
times it would be found to clear all the existing 
countervailing objections to the protection of tort. If 
the threshold search for a relevant pocket of caselaw 
was replaced by this analysis it would release lower 
courts from the problem of identifying with which 
earlier cases to associate the current complex case. As 
the court considered each in turn the earlier caselaw 
relevant to that particular objection to the recognition 
of the duty of care would be come relevant. Moreover 
the conservatism of the current House of Lords can be 
accommodated: the degree to which the court needs 
to be satisfied that the plaintiff's case did overcome 
these concerns might be set very high. Indeed, this 
approach might be a more successful vehicle for the 
conservatism of the House of Lords, because although 
it might involve more detailed analysis in some cases 
it would produce results which openly tallied with 
rational policy concerns and were therefore more 
convincing than the somewhat mysterious threshold 
selection of 'relevant caselaw' based on a received but 
not explained wisdom. 
Clearly the first step on an approach which seeks 
to re-emphasize the law's countervailing concerns 
about the imposition of tort liability must be a 
stronger identification of what these factors are. Iron-
ically, incrementalism has recently worked to hinder 
just such a development. One result has been that 
appellate courts have delivered some confusing and 
awkward dicta on what the concerns of tort law 
should be. Thus in the two very similar cases men-
tioned above (Smith v. Bush and D & F Estates) the 
House of Lords not only reached opposite results but 
called upon the concept of 'consumer protection' to 
support respectively the recognition of a duty of care 
and its denial." Another result is that courts have 
failed to draw out of earlier cases and develop a pol-
icy of not assisting with the protection of a tort obli-
gation those plaintiffs who had an appropriate 
avenue of alternative protection (on which see 
below) has made tort law appear (apparently, at 
least) more protective of business interests than 
arguably it should be, especially given that the 
severe and increasing problem of access to justice 
faced by private plaintiffs has become more widely 
appreciated. A third inadequacy of the current incre- 
• Smith v. Bush [1989) 2 W.L.R. 790; D. & F. Estates Ltd. V. 
Church Commissioners for England [19881 2 All ER. 992, 1007 
(per Lord Bridge). 
• Ross v. Counters 119801 Ch. 297. But see White v. Jones 
[1993) 3 All E.R. 481 (CA.), HL appeal heard 7.3.94-14.3.94.. 
mental approach is that it has failed to provide a 
doctrinal basis for understanding cases such as Ross 
v. Counters" where recovery was, until recently at 
least, widely agreed as justified but the facts of 
which fell into no recognised pocket of cases let 
alone one which sanctioned recovery for economic 
loss. 
_Finally the current incremental approach provides 
no satisfying answer to the question of the relation-
ship of one cause of action to another. It is obvious 
that, once the law has taken a wrong turning or oth-
erwise fallen into an unsatisfactory internal state in 
relation to a particular cause of action, incremental-
ism cannot provide the answer: it will not, for exam- \ 
ple, be able to rectify the ludicrous position the TuTeir 
governing recovery for nervous shock have now 
reached (see below). But it also does not begin to 
answer the more common problems which arise 
where, for example, the behaviour of a particular 
defendant may support allegations of more than one 
tort. In such cases the claim of the plaintiff may call 
for the resolution of the question of how the torts 
interact—specifically the question of whether the 
fact that the defendant can claim a defence to one 
tort should influence that defendant's exposure to 
liability under the other. This problem, recently 
exposed in two cases before the Court of Appeal (see 
below), can only be satisfactorily resolved on the 
basis of broad principles, and, like the problem of 
the duty of care in negligence, what is needed here 
are not crude aphorisms: defamation trumps negli-
gence; natural rights trump nuisance; negligent pro-
fessional advice trumps acquisition of defective 
property." What is needed and what is still compati-
ble with the general conservative approach preferred 
by the House of Lords is sharp identification of those 
underlying concerns/policies/principles on which 
the law's caution in recognising the plaintiff's cause 
of action under each tort is based. This could pro-
vide lower courts with substantive arguments (as 
well as conservative arguments if desired) for analyz-
ing new cases and could provide disappointed plain-
tiffs with explanations for their fate which are more 
convincing than the simple assertion that it was not 
just and reasonable to help them. 
2. Some Misconceived Countervailing Concerns 
Most physical loss cases in the tort of negligence 
raise sufficiently few concerns that a duty of care is 
" See respectively, Spring v. Guardian Assurance plc. 
[19931 2 All ER. 273 (C.A.), HL appeal heard 29.11.93-
30.11.93, Cambridge Water Co. v. Eastern Counties Leather plc. 
(CA.). 119941 1 All ER. 53 but see 63 (reversal by HL); Smith v. 
Bush 119891 2 W.L.R. 790. 
87 
In Restraint of Tort 
either 'self-evident' or militated against only by a 
couple of concerns. At its simplest such cases merely 
require a balance to be struck between the two coun-
tervailing freedoms, one person's freedom of action 
and another's freedom from injury, although this can 
involve profound questions about legitimate expecta-
tions and the trade-off between autonomy and pre-
vention." Even so, in some cases special concern 
can arise with regard to issues as diverse as the 
impact of liability on industrial relations or on social 
benevolence." 
The area in which replacement of `pockets' with 
an emphasis on countervailing concerns against lia-
bility would have most impact is the field of eco-
nomic loss.' Although it was anxiety about such 
claims which produced the current retreat to incre-
mentalism in general and tightening of economic 
loss recovery in particular there are three misunder-
standings underlying that anxiety which will need to 
be resolved before a coherent agenda of countervail-
ing factors can be defined for that and other areas of 
law. 
Originally the problem with allowing liability for 
economic loss had been thought to be the unfairness 
on defendants of indeterminate liability the so-called 
'opening of the floodgates' problem. So it seemed 
odd that the context in which the House of Lords' 
hostility to recovery in tort for economic loss first 
arose was not those cases in which the ripple effect 
of negligent conduct raised the floodgates problem 
most acutely (for example, bad investment advice) 
but in the area of claims for economic loss where it 
was patently absent: claims by owners for the eco-
nomic loss suffered in acquiring property of defec-
tive quality. Factors other than floodgates were 
clearly fuelling judicial disquiet. Three different con-
cerns can be identified. 
(a) Socio-economic impact of the common law; 
separation of powers 
A system which allows law to be made or 'devel-
oped' by common law judges and by a supreme legis- 
See e.g„ the comment of Lord Brandon in Mobil Oil Hong 
Kong Ltd. and Dow Chemical (Hong Kong) Ltd. v. Hong Kong 
United Dockyards Ltd., The 'Hua Lien' 11991) 1 Lloyds L.R. 
309, 329 (P.C.). 
" For example, by staying awake and keeping a lookout a 
car passenger may have been able to help avoid the accident 
which injures her but respect for her autonomy is here held to 
outweigh the concern with deterrence so she is not held con-
tributorily negligent. Contrast the question of what obligation if 
any a pregnant woman owes her unborn child, see Re S 119921 
3 W.L.R. 806, casenote at 119931 C.L.J. 21. 
" See respectively Morris v. Ford Motor Co. Ltd. 119731 Q.B. 
792 and the rescue cases. 
" J. Stapleton, op. cit. 
" A decision praised by Mr Justice Evatt in a letter to Lord 
lature has at its heart a dilemma which the separa-
tion of powers doctrine is inadequate to resolve. On 
the one hand, looking back in time it is those judg-
ments which cut through the minutiae of legal prece-
dents to draw from them and establish a bold new 
principle which are regarded as the finest pillars of 
the common law and which back its claim to be a 
vital and responsive source of law. Often such cases 
can be seen with hindsight to have produced, some-
times gradually (Donoghue v. Stevenson) sometimes 
rapidly (Hedley Byrne), a large rearrangement of 
socio-economic relationships. In confident times this 
is seen as an acceptable even desirable consequence 
of the flexibility and power of the common law. 
Donoghue v. Stevenson is a notable example from 
tort law," but one of the best illustrations comes 
from contract: the paternalistic implication of war-
ranties into commercial dealings in goods in the 19th 
century which, although having substantial impact 
on those sellers who had hitherto relied on the 
caveat emptor principle is now regarded as the 'very 
heart' of the modern law of sale." 
Periodically, however, it is to be expected that the 
judiciary will be daunted by the power at its disposal 
to disrupt expectations and generate powerful new 
economic forces." Nor is it unexpected that even 
when there is a wave of restraint affecting a much 
broader field, it will be felt most strongly in the rela-
tively unstructured field of tort law, especially negli-
gence law. The most powerful catalyst of the recent 
swing back to fettering the discretion of judges to 
develop the law of tort was the controversial and 
almost immediately apparent impact on local gov-
ernment finances of the decision in Anns. Of course 
there is a real problem for the law when a deep 
pocket defendant (such as a local authority) is held 
jointly and severally liable with a class of defendants 
(for example builders) who often turn out to be judg-
ment-proof. De facto a disproportionate burden of 
the liability will fall on the former, a particularly 
problematic result if it has public duties to perform. 
But it is not a convincing argument simply to deride 
Atkin on the grounds that 'the common law is again shown to 
be capable of striking through the forms of legal separateness to 
reality': G. Lewis, Lord Atkin (London, Butterworths, 1983) 67. 
" P. Atiyah, The Sale of Goods, 8th ed. (London. Pitman, 
1990) 142. 
" There is, for example, recent evidence of a widespread 
judicial concern on this point in the US leading to a significant 
retrenchment of tort liability: J. Henderson and T. Eisenberg, 
'The Quiet Revolution in Products Liability: An Empirical 
Study of Legal Change' (1990) 37 U.C.L.A. 479. Note also the 
dramatic shift in emphasis of Lord Bridge who as recently as 
1982 had been opposed to an 'unwarranted abdication of the 
courts function of developing and adapting principles of the 
common law to changing conditions': McLoughlin v. O'Brien 
119821 2 All E.R. 298, 319. 
88 
Jane Stapleton 
Anns as the sort of 'judicial legislation' which 
offends the separation of powers doctrine, as this 
could be said of those other admired landmarks in 
the law which had comparable effects. There may be 
special problems with the Anns decision but the fact 
that it produced a significant socio-economic impact 
does not distinguish it from other settled cases. 
Nor was it convincing to attack Anns on the basis 
that before that case Parliament had in some way 
attempted to 'cover the field' by enacting the Defec-
tive Premises Act 1972. Ironically the history of that 
piece of legislation shows rather that it was the cul-
mination of Parliamentary frustration at the timidity 
of judges unwilling to extend the broad principle of 
Donoghue v. Stevenson to builder/vendors.' If any-
thing, that Act shows how important Parliament is as 
a corrective when the complex activities of the com- 
mon law go badly wrong. If matters in the economic 
loss field continue to lurch along in the way they 
have done, perhaps the future will again see Parlia-
ment intervening to correct the anomalies the current 
blinkered incremental approach is producing. 
But the concern with socio-economic impact and 
the separation of powers is not a specious one. Even 
if the role of tort law is principally a symbolic one, it 
must take care not to appear to usurp the regulatory 
role of Parliament across large fields—a criticism to 
which the considerably more activist US judiciary is 
exposed. Perhaps the non-lawyer is better at seeing 
the intuitive difference between a court declaring the 
design of a chimney or car negligent, and a court 
holding that given its health risks the marketing of 
tobacco is negligent: the former holding has rela- 
tively isolated impact, the latter threatens to destroy 
an industry," put thousands out of work and have 
significant tax revenue implications. The implied 
'separation of powers' argument in the rhetoric of 
judges recognises the fact that those adversely 
affected by the wide ranging redistributional effects 
of such cases may legitimately prefer to see these 
grave matters in the hands of elected representatives. 
The problem for the law is that so far no legitimate 
doctrinal technique has been found to distinguish 
claims by individuals injured by the negligent design 
or marketing of dangerous products according to the 
size of the market for the particular product. 
There are techniques by which litigants and courts 
can mask the problem. Negligent design cases for 
" Murphy v. Brentwood District Council [1990) 2 All ER. 
908, 923 (per Lard Keith). 
4° Stapleton, op. cit., 268-9 (see also 278). See Law Commis-
sion Report No. 40 (1970) para. 73 and the speech of Mr Ivor 
Richard, Part Debates, Vol. (830) col. 1821 (11.2.72), a relevant 
‘promotor' of the legislation for the purposes of Pepper (Inspec-
tor of Taxes) v. Hart 11993) 1 All E.R. 42 (H.L.). The Occupiers 
example can be couched as failure to warn claims; 
but sometimes this is not feasible. Applying joint 
and several liability to deep pocketed authorities for 
their failure to control the conduct of third parties in 
a major area of their activity is one such case. Where 
the third party is often not good for judgment the 
impact on taxpayers is large, obvious and direct. But 
as New Zealand law shows, courts do still have a 
choice when faced with cases with large socio- 
economic implications, such as building inspection 
cases. Courts can choose to make a bold application 
of general principle to the relevant activity thereby 
indirectly applying pressure on Parliament to regu-
late the activity. The alternative is to make a rea-
soned case for exempting local authorities from 
liability for their carelessness. Underlying this 
choice is a tradeoff between different goals. The 
advantage of the New Zealand approach is that it 
ensures the individual plaintiff has someone worth-
while to sue. Its disadvantage, as in all cases of lia-
bility for the conduct of third parties, is that it 
deflects attention from the party directly responsible 
for the damage, and this undermines the deterrent 
and moral symbolism of liability (a point I will 
return to later). The strength of the approach of the 
current House of Lords is that it avoids this deflec-
tion of attention. Unhappily, however, it has also 
thrown up a protective wall around negligent sub-
contractors who are responsible for much of the cre-
ation of defective property and with respect to whom 
the imposition of liability would not create a disturb-
ing socio-economic impact: 
To sum up: in D & F Estates/Murphy the references 
to Parliament were ill-thought out. Except in rare 
cases (such as the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957) 
there is no evidence that Parliament has or wants 
impliedly to cover a field of civil obligation. More-
over, unless the common law is to become mori-
bund, bold decisions which result in major 
rearrangement of socio-economic relationships are 
inevitable. Such rearrangements per se are not a rea-
son for concern: cases such as Walton (the manufac-
turer's duty to recall certain dangerous products) and 
Smith v. Bush had substantial effects but are not 
regarded as results of improper 'judicial legislation'. 
That is not to say that we cannot extract from Mur-
phy a sound countervailing factor to include on any 
agenda of concerns militating against tort liability, 
Liability Act 1957 was similarly a response by a legislature 
frustrated by the failure of judges to extend the simple 
Donoghue v. Stevenson principle to the occupiers liability 
field. See also n. 111 below. 
" As has been the fate of the intra-uterine device industry 
and most of the asbestos industry. 
89 
In Restraint of Tort 
Mr' 
but it has nothing to do with Parliament or large 
socio-economic impact per se. The concern is and 
should be defined more specifically, namely that the 
relevant liability had a particular socio-economic 
effect—a substantially damaging impact on local gov-
ernment finances—which attracted concern. In fail-
ing to separate out this specific concern, the House of 
Lords has confused the reasons for shielding local 
authorities from liability with the quite separate rea-
sons for shielding private contractors. 
(b) Insurance 
Recently I have heard appellate judges informally 
describe the current incremental approach to tort 
claims as a reaction to the insurance background of 
such claims. One impression given is that in certain 
cases, denying a duty of care is justified because it 
will not leave future victims uncompensated because 
they have or could have insured the particular loss. 
But this argument is as flawed as the earlier reliance 
by some advocates of expansion of liability on the 
argument that future defendants will not be crippled 
by the relevant liability because they are or could be 
insured against that loss. If tort law is to retain an 
appearance of coherence as a private law mechanism 
for the vindication of an individual plaintiff's rights 
against an individual defendant it must be that, as 
Justice Stephen of the Australian. High Court 
implied, insurance may follow liability but liability 
need not follow insurance." 
Any intended moral or economic incentives of lia-
bility are already weakened where insurance exists' 
but predicating the existence of liability on the exis-
tence or availability of insurance cuts away any 
grounds for such incentives. The concept of negli- 
gence liability is posited on the defendant's conduct 
being wrong, a 'wrong', and it is morally incoherent 
for such a judgement to hinge on the availability of 
first party insurance to his victim. Just as if liability 
is treated simply as a gateway to an insurance pool," 
it fails to provide a reason why anyone ever should 
42 Caltex Oil v. The Willemstad (1976) 136 C.L.R. 529, 580: 
'the task of the court remains that of loss-fixing rather than 
loss-spreading'. 
• J. Stapleton. Product Liability (London, Buttenvorths, 
1994), 6.05 (i). 
• D. Harris, 'Evaluating the Goals of Personal Injury Law: 
Some Empirical Evidence' in Essays for Patrick Atiyah, ed. P. 
Cane and J. Stapleton (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1991) 289. 
a' For example, house insurance was the motivation for the 
girl and wife's claims in n. 12. 
a°  Contrast T. Weir describing s. 2 of the Defective Premises 
Act 1972 as a 'striking and admirable instance of the ouster of 
tort law where the plaintiff has adequate insurance cover 
against the risk in question': Casebook on Tort, 6th ed. (Lon-
don, Sweet & Maxwell, 1988) 66. The preferable interpretation 
is that while the D.P.A. creates a cause of action for owners of 
the defective premises. it excludes from such protection those 
lose a tort claim. If liability is denied because the 
plaintiff could get first party insurance it penalises 
the cautious and would severely limit the scope of 
tort recovery since such insurance is available 
against many forms of actionable loss. The liability 
of one particular individual to another must be based 
on reasons other than insurance. 
The presence or absence of insurance certainly 
affects who sues and is sued," but it should not 
determine who is liable to whom, any more than the 
wealth or poverty of the parties does. It is certainly 
not a legitimate factor for inclusion in any agenda 
of countervailing concerns militating against tort lia-
bility. 
(c) The 'correct' spheres of tort and contract: linear 
liability 
Underlying the reining in of liability in negligence 
seems to be a concern that it had begun to encroach 
on the legitimate sphere of contract. Thus to grant 
protection to the plaintiff in Junior Books was seen 
as tantamount to providing it with a warranty of 
quality for which it had not paid the defendant.' 
The most obvious objection to this is that the very 
nature of tort protection is that it is awarded even 
where the plaintiff had not paid the defendant for it. 
Mrs Donoghue was in effect given the protection of a 
warranty of safety without paying for it. Moreover, in 
the context of Junior Books to say that warranties of 
quality are the province of contract is mere assertion. 
A better reason for opposition to that decision needs 
to be found. 
In fact there is, underlying the 'warranty' argument 
against Junior Books, a much stronger and far more 
general dichotomy, one which does not correspond 
with the line of privity but is often confused with it, 
and one which provides a more convincing basis for 
criticism of that and other expansionary cases. This 
is the choice the law of obligations has when faced 
with a sequence of dealings or potential dealings. On 
the one hand, the law might prefer to simplify the 
owners who have been able to secure from an appropriate 
party alternative (warranty) protection in their bargain (and 
price). More generally: even if a plaintiff can get first-party 
insurance for the risk, the question is, should the plaintiff have 
to pay for such cover or should he/she be entitled in law to that 
protection. (The question is important because the wealth dis-
tribution consequences are quite different in the 2 cases.) If a 
plaintiff is held to be entitled to the protection in law and he 
can bargain with the obliged party he may freely choose to sell 
it (by accepting an exclusion clause in return for a monetary 
advantage). One piece of evidence that he did so freely would 
be that he had the back-up of freely available first party insur-
ance for that type of risk, but here insurance is relevant only to 
the genuineness of the bargaining around the legal entitlement 
not to its initial allocation. 
See discussion of the warranty point in Stapleton op. cit. 
(1991) 268 et seq. 
90 
Jane Stapleton 
4 
relevant obligations of the parties by imposing them 
in a linear form. The first party would owe an obliga-
tion only to the party next in sequence and that 
party's obligations in turn would only be owed to the 
next and so on. In other words, the eventual victim, 
the plaintiff, would be prevented from leapfrogging a 
party with whom it had had dealings or could have 
had dealings in order to sue a distant party. This 
form of liability is most well known in contract 
where it is secured by the doctrine of privity. How-
ever it is a major and widespread misconception to 
see this form of liability arrangement as synonymous 
with a contractual vision of law. It is a form of 
arrangement also available in tort law: a tort plaintiff 
may be refused a claim against a distant party even 
though the plaintiff does not have (nor reasonably 
could have had) a contract with another intermediate 
party so that any protection the plaintiff could fall 
back on when faced with this refusal is at most a tort 
obligation owed by, say, that intermediate party.' 
Although not yet explicitly recognised in UK law," 
the 'learned intermediary' doctrine in the US is a 
good example of this. This doctrine states that so 
long as the drug manufacturer adequately warns the 
GP of the product's risks, it has discharged its duty 
to warn and is not liable to a patient injured by the 
product, who is therefore forced to concentrate his 
claim, be it in tort or contract, against the GP:  The 
deployment by US tort law of this linear form of lia-
bility rests on the wholly tenable assumption that 
patients are far more likely to have been influenced 
by GP advice than by package inserts from manufac-
turers.5° In other product contexts where this 
assumption about the intermediary's role fails, the 
law may then revert to the alternative strategy of 
imposing obligations on manufacturers to distant 
victims regardless of whether, for example, the man-
ufacturer had adequately warned the intermediary. 
Intermediary not a co-tortfeasor 
The preferable basis of the criticism of Junior Books, 
then, is that sometimes a linear arrangement of liabil-
ity may be justified and that, on the facts of that case, 
this was the situation there. Such a linear arrange-
ment may be justified even where the intermediary is 
not negligent. In Junior Books the argument would be 
For example, if for some reason local authorities were 
held not to owe pedestrians a duty of care with respect to the 
maintenance of roads, the injured pedestrian would have to 
look to the vehicle driver for protection. 
49 A fact clearly related to the remarkable paucity of judg-
ments relating to pharmaceuticals in the UK. 
5° Stapleton, Product Liability, op. cit. 10.07 (ii), The ven-
dor's immunity from suit, which is another example of a form 
of linear arrangement of obligations, rests on more controver- 
that given the circumstances it was not unfair to 
require the commercial plaintiff to seek protection 
from the party with which it had directly dealt, that 
is, the main contractor. Instead of relying on bald 
and unconvincing assertions that warranties of qual-
ity are the province of contract not tort, appellate 
court would be better advised to defend their criti-
cism of Junior Books by explaining why, in certain 
circumstances, it is preferable to channel liability 
through the sequence of dealings of the parties than 
to allow the victim to leapfrog the party it had or 
could have dealt with and sue the negligent creator 
of the defective property directly. Care would have 
to be taken here. The 'explanation' cannot simply be 
the assertion that it is unfair for the defendant sub-
contractor to have to face obligations other than 
those owed to parties in privity with him, for this is 
the privity fallacy.' 
But reasons can be found here, just as they could 
in the learned intermediary context. The most con-
vincing reason in the circumstances of Junior Books 
is that the plaintiff had had an appropriate opportu-
nity to protect itself, either in its dealings with the 
main contractor or by dealing directly with the sub-
contractor.' Instead, then, of deriving from the 
opposition to Junior Books a denial of all claims 
against the creator of defective acquired property 
with respect to its quality, the more convincing 
deduction is a countervailing factor to liability 
which refers to the adequacy of the appropriate alter-
native means of protection available to the plaintiff. 
Not all avenues of protection are 'appropriate' in this 
sense. First party insurance, for example, is not. In 
Junior Books the alternative means of protection of 
bargaining with the contractors were 'appropriate' 
because this (unlike insurance) would have been 
likely to generate adequate deterrence incentives on 
sub-contractors." 
Distinct advantages would follow if appellate 
courts abandoned their reliance on assertions that 
certain types of obligation are the province of con-
tract and determined whether a plaintiff should be 
granted the protection of a tort obligation from a dis-
tant defendant on the basis of whether the plaintiff 
had had an appropriate opportunity to protect itself 
in its dealings, or potential dealings, with another 
suitable party. First, some case law would be more 
sial assumptions. 
" Which is antithetical to the existence of independent tort 
obligations, see Stapleton (1991), op. at 251-2. 
" Among other reasons for channelling obligations is easing 
proof problems of plaintiffs—the probable basis of the chan-
nelled form of liability in the Consumer Protection Act 1987. 
" A later article will give a more detailed explanation of 
these deterrence-based ideas. 
91 
In Restraint of Tort 
intelligible: for example the decision in Smith v. 
Bush would be compatible with opposition to the 
decision in Junior Books. Secondly, there would be 
no risk of the reasoning collapsing into some version 
of the privity fallacy. Thirdly, adequacy of appropri-
ate alternative means of protection is part of a much 
bigger picture. It is relevant in all situations not just 
in cases where there is a sequence of parties; and it is 
an important and effective constraint on the growth 
of tort law. In particular it would help us to find the 
demarcation line between plaintiffs to whom the law 
grants protection not bargained for, and plaintiffs to 
whom no such help is to be given. It is now appreci-
ated that in many areas this line does not correspond 
with the no privity/privity line. Plaintiffs technically 
linked by privity with the defendant may still be 
given protection while plaintiffs who are strangers to 
the defendant may yet be refused tort protection. 
Privity is not the appropriate organising principle 
here. 
Appropriate Alternative Means of Protection 
Elsewhere I have noted that imbedded in past 
caselaw on economic loss there is a concern not to 
assist plaintiffs who had certain alternative means of 
protection" and some recent dicta and caselaw have 
confirmed the importance of this particular hurdle in 
both tripartite and bilateral cases. Thus in the recent 
Canadian case of Norsk" the powerful dissent of La 
Forest et al. used this argument to find against the 
plaintiff in a situation analogous to that of the Min-
eral Transporter case: the plaintiff, who relied on the 
integrity of the property of a party with whom it had 
a contractual relationship, suffered economic loss as 
the result of physical damage caused to that property 
by the negligence of the defendant. The plaintiff is 
regarded as having in its contractual relationship 
with the property owner, real (not just nominal) and 
adequate means of protecting itself from the relevant 
risk, while appropriately feeding back into a relevant 
" Stapleton (1991) op. cit. 
as Canadian National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific 
Steamship Co. (1992) 91 D.L.R. (4th) 289, 346 (La Forest J. with 
whom Sopinka and lacobucci J. J. concurred). On which see 
casenotes by J. Fleming (1993) 1 Tort Law Rev. 68; M. McInnes 
(1993) Camb. L.J. 12; B. Markesinis (1993) 109 L.Q.R. 5. See 
also the discussion in Stapleton (1991) op. cit. 263-4 of the 
Mineral Transporter case 119861 1 A.C.r. 
" See e.g., Wentworth v. Wiltshire County Council (19931 2 
All ER. 256 (CA.) and Wood v. The Law Society, The Times, 
30.7.93 (Q.B.D.). Some of the reasoning in these cases, espe-
cially in the advice cases, is problematic because it does not 
address the issue of when the alternative means of protection 
may be 'inappropriate' because, for example, their use encour-
ages wasteful duplication of effort and actual dilution of deter-
rence incentives. Nevertheless, there is clearly an important 
restraining principle lobe developed here. 
chain of dealings adequate deterrence incentives. Its 
claim, if any, should therefore be against that party 
who in turn has a claim against the negligent injurer 
of the property. 
Closer to home, the availability of certain alterna-
tive means of protection has been used in judicial 
reasoning across a wide range of issues." In recent 
personal injury cases involving the discretion under 
section 33 of the Limitation Act, for example, the 
Court of Appeal has held that one factor relevant to 
the exercise of that discretion is whether the plaintiff 
has an alternative means of protection in the form of 
a claim against his or her solicitor for negligence.' 
In another important Court of Appeal case the alter-
native means of protection argument was used to 
support a decision that a local authority could not 
sue for libel in respect of its governing or administra-
tive reputation when no actual financial loss was 
alleged." Similarly the argument is becoming more 
explicit in advice cases. For example the more pow-
erful reason used to defeat the plaintiff's claim in tort 
in Gran Geltao" was that the plaintiff's claim 
directly against the landlord was sufficient protec-
tion, and a duplicate claim in tort against the land-
lord's solicitor was not necessary. Similarly the 
reasonableness of reliance is now being seen to 
hinge, inter alia, on the advisee's ability to obtain 
independent advice. In James McNaughton" (in the 
context of a friendly takeover) it was stressed that a 
relevant factor in denying an advisee-bidder a claim 
against the advisor (the auditor of the target com-
pany) was that the advisee should have sought inde-
pendent advice, and it was noted that in business 
transactions conducted at arms length it would 
be difficult to rebut the view that advisees should 
take independent advice even where the advisor-
defendant had dealt directly with them. Of course, in 
this light the recognition of a duty of care in Hedley 
Byrne itself is open to serious question (and rightly 
so) because the plaintiffs in that case could either 
have obtained independent advice or paid for the 
3' Hartley v. Birmingham City District Council 119921 2 All 
E.R. 213 (CA.). Ramsden v. Lee (19921 2 All ER. 204 (CA.), 
although in both cases s. 33 was exercised in the plaintiff's 
favour. 
" Derbyshire County Council v. Time Newspapers Ltd. 
119921 3 All ER. 65, 81 (Balcombe L. J.). 
" Gran Gelato Ltd. v. Richcliff (Group) Ltd. 119921 1 All ER. 
865 (Ch.). For criticisms of the other reasons (and outcome) see 
P. Cane, 'Negligent Solicitor Escapes Liability' (1992) 109 
L.Q.R. 539; A. Tettenborn, 'Enquiries before Contract—The 
Wrong Answer?' 119921 Camb. L.J. 415. Also, what about the 
potential claim by the plaintiff against his or her own solici-
tors? 
" fames McNaughton Papers Gimp Ltd. v. Hicks Anderson 
& Co. (a firm) 119911 I All ER. 134, 144-6. See also: Ultra-
mares Corp. v. Touche, Niven & Co. (1931) 174 N.E. 441. 
1
J
92 
Jane Stapleton 
information, thus securing contractual protection. 
But it is a good explanation for Smith v. Bush and 
provides a clear justification for shifting the protec-
tion of tort towards private plaintiffs and away from 
commercial plaintiffs. 
Multiple Causes 
The more courts are willing to adopt a linear arrange-
ment of obligations in tort—refusing to allow plain-
tiffs to leapfrog a party the plaintiff had or could 
have dealt with in order to sue a distant tortfeasor—
the more manageable becomes the problem of multi-
ple causation. In the modern world, as it has become 
more feasible to implicate the `carelessness' of many 
parties in a deleterious outcome plaintiffs often 
appear to be in a position to choose randomly 
between defendants. Short of abandoning joint and 
several liability—itself an interesting option—the 
control of this problem and the associated de facto 
channelling of liability burdens to deep pocket 
defendants is best helped by the use of linear obliga-
tions to shield the more peripheral parties. 
One objection to linear liability here is that it may 
force the plaintiff to sue a party other than the one 
whose careless conduct directly created the danger-
ous situation. In most cases it will force the plaintiff 
to rely on suing an intermediate party usually in con-
tract, and to rely on a chain of litigation to ensure the 
loss is ultimately distributed to the correct parties. 
This may not only appear odd but unjust if the inter-
mediate party is not good for judgment" and these 
are both factors against which the original reason for 
channelling must be weighed. 
Where the intermediary is a co-tortfeasor 
Ironically though, unless we are solely committed to 
making life easier for plaintiffs, the phenomenon of a 
party not being good for judgment can cut the other 
way and in favour of linear liability where the inter-
mediate party is a co-tortfeasor. We have already 
seen in the context of the liability of local authorities 
for negligent inspection of buildings that the likeli-
hood of the intermediary in such cases (a builder) 
not being good for judgment proved a positive reason 
for channelling liability and preventing the plaintiff 
leapfrogging the builder to sue the local authority 
• As in Gran Gelato Ltd. v. Richeliff (Group) Ltd. 119921 I 
All ER. 865. Compare Junior Books. 
" Although see cases noted earlier where the criminal is 
sued directly. 
• Dorset Yacht Co. Ltd. v. Home Office 119691 2 Q.B. 412. 
Compare, attitudes to the police: footnote 71 below. 
e' Cunningham v. Reading Football Club (Q.B.D.) Indepen- 
(because otherwise a disproportionate amount of 
overall liability with respect to defective buildings 
would end up on the shoulders of local taxpayers 
rather than on careless builders). 
But there are other fields in which reasons exist for 
preventing plaintiffs leapfrogging another party who 
is most directly responsible for their injury. Take, for 
example, the area of liability for the criminal acts of 
third parties. Violent criminals are very often not 
themselves good for judgment." Was it really such a 
self-evidently good idea to make the Home Office 
liable for the property damage caused by escaping 
Borstal boys?" Why is it right that a football club 
should be held liable when hooligans break off con-
crete parts of the premises and hurl them at other 
entrants?" Isn't it stretching the reach of a 
respectable tort law too much for a rape victim to be 
able to sue the local authority employer of her 
attacker?" From the area of products liability; when 
and why should the law of tort require manufactur-
ers to render their products resistant to criminal tam-
pering?; and should a lock or burglar alarm 
manufacturer be liable for personal injury damages 
when its defective product fails and someone is 
attacked by a burglar? 
Given that the criminal is usually judgment proof, 
is it a sensible outcome for the full load of liability to 
end on the shoulders of a party whose negligence is 
really peripheral? Of course, if we believe tort is or 
should become a conduit for substantial compensa-
tion we might be tempted to say yes, because allow-
ing plaintiffs to sue many different parties increases 
the chances of recovering from at least one. But if we 
believe this is not the case, and that the role of tort 
law is really a symbolic one of maintaining balance 
and justice then we might regard it as unfortunate 
that such defendants end up with all the liability 
burden and accompanying stigma. Moreover, already 
in the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme soci-
ety seems to have acknowledged that such injuries 
are a group risk with group responsibility. In as 
much as the impetus for the expansion of tort law in 
the field of obligations to control third parties is gen-
erated by a hope that substantial numbers of plain-
tiffs will use tort as a gateway to compensation, it is 
a false basis for expansion. To the extent that tort is 
really about the symbolism of moral and deterrence 
values, we should be taking a much harder look at 
dent, 20.3.91. Compare the preferable approach to liability in 
Tapp v. London County Bus (South West) Ltd. (CA.) 119931 1 
W.L.R. 976 (defendant's highjacked bus causing injury to 
plaintiff). 
" F. Bawdon, Tutting a Price on Rape: increasing compen-
sation awards', N.L.J., 12.3.93, 371. 372. 
93 
In Restraint of Tort 
such liability and deploying linear arrangements of 
obligations where possible without necessarily deny-
ing plaintiffs any claim at all." 
3. Teasing out some countervailing concerns 
from existing caselaw 
(a) Is the plaintiff using tort to circumvent an 
understanding of where the loss should fall? 
There needs to be a more tightly developed tortious 
notion which denies protection to plaintiffs who are 
seeking to use tort to evade a prior understanding (to 
which the plaintiff was party) of how obligations are 
arranged. This is another and again a better reason 
on which to attack Junior Books' than that given by 
judicial critics. It is also a further reason in support 
of the dissentients' denial of a duty of care in Norsk 
where the plaintiff had chosen not to extract contrac-
tual protection with the property owner (the licence 
agreement explicitly provided the plaintiff could not 
claim damages from the latter in the event of closure 
of the bridge in an emergency") and had presumably 
gained a financial advantage in doing so. 
In bipartite situations where a defendant injured a 
plaintiff directly by positive conduct the issue is 
handled moderately well by a variable standard of 
care and very occasionally by the defence of volenti. 
But if we hope to restrain tort by an increased 
emphasis on linear liability (and we recognise that 
this does not necessarily mean that the protection to 
which plaintiffs will have to resort need be in con-
tract) the position is more complex: the courts must 
be sensitive to arguments by distant tortfeasors that 
the understanding between the parties was that the 
plaintiff would seek protection/redress against 
another p'arty (perhaps an intermediary) rather than 
directly against the distant party himself. In accept-
ing this argument courts must feel confident that 
they know what it is that the plaintiff had accepted. 
In contract, express terms are a useful starting point 
for the same restraining pre-condition on protec- 
Compare caveat emptor and J. Gordley's argument that it 
was used to protect innocent middle-parties in a chain of sales: 
Philosophical Origins of Modern Contract Doctrine (Oxford, 
Clarendon Press. 1991) 159. 
" See Stapleton (1991) op. cit. 287. 
Canadian National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific 
Steamship Co. (1992), 91 D.L.R. (4th) 289, 296 (per La Forest, 
J.). 
For if they are freely agreed to by the plaintiff, he or she is 
denied any claim for an inconsistent implied term: Johnstone 
v. Bloomsbury Health Authority 119911 2 W.L.R. 1362 (here the 
term contended for was held to be not inconsistent with the 
express term). The problem also arises in chains of contracts, 
see e.g., P. Atiyah, op. cit., 148-9. 
K. Williams, 'Defences for drunken drivers: Public Policy 
on the roads and in the air' (1991) 54 M.L.R. 745, 751. See, on  
lion." But outside that, courts are not yet sufficiently 
scrupulous in policing this pre-condition to protec-
tion. In contract this does not matter so much given 
the need for plaintiffs positively to establish an 
implied term for protection—and the unduly restric-
tive attitude English courts take to terms implied by 
law. But in tort there is as yet insufficient develop-
ment of the idea and its associated problems, for 
example of how a distant but known exclusion 
clause affects a plaintiff's claim in tort. 
(b) Dignity of the law 
Another partly-submerged consideration relevant to 
the protection by the law of a plaintiff by, say, the 
recognition of a new duty of care is whether such a 
move would bring the law into disrepute or maintain 
it in that state. Defining this countervailing factor can 
be tricky. Even though it is well known for example 
that the occasions on which courts are moved to 
deploy the defences of volenti and especially illegal-
ity are best explained on this concern rather than 
other grounds," the formulation of a predictive test 
of these occasions has proved elusive. Even so the 
concern is a real one. It implicitly bolsters for exam-
ple the protection from suit afforded to much police 
action." But it is a factor that can cut both ways. The 
pro-plaintiff decision in Baker v. Willoughby" 
(where the plaintiff succeeded even though he could 
not establish the but-for connection between the 
defendant's fault and the damage complained about) 
was clearly influenced by the embarrassment it 
would be to the law that the victim of one tort would 
have been better off than the victim of two torts. 
The dignity of the law is a concern which deserves 
re-emphasis in the future not least because doctrinal 
developments have now produced areas of intolera-
ble embarrassment with which incrementalism—in 
particular, incrementalism of the 'pre-judged pock-
ets' form—is inadequate to deal. P. R. Glazebrook has 
already eloquently attacked the 'affront to public 
decency' represented by awards of damages for the 
illegality. Pitts v. Hunt (19901 3 W.L.R. 542 and on volenti see 
Morris v. Morris 119901 3 All E.R. 801. 
" Hilly. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire(1988I 2 All E.R. 
238 (H.L.); Arica v. McDermott N.L.J., 12.3.93 (C.A.); Osman's 
case Independent, 8.10.92 (CA.), although see Kirkham v. 
Anderton, Independent, 16.1.90 (CA.) (damages against police 
with respect to a suicide would not affront the public con-
science or shock the ordinary citizen so the defence of ex turpi 
cause failed), and the (surely borderline) case of Welsh v. Chief 
Constable of the Merseyside Police [19931 1 All E.R. 692, con-
cerning the Crown Prosecution Service. 
Baker v. Willoughby (19701 AC. 467 (H.C). In the causa-
tion field-, see also Cook v. Lewis 119521 1 D.L.R. 1; Summers v. 
Tice (1948) 199 P. 2d 1; McGhee v. National Coal Board (19721 
3 All ER. 1008 (H.C.). Is the loss of amenities head of damages 
in personal injuries claims motivated by a related concern? 
94 
Jane Stapleton 
plex and mysterious process. May it not be a major 
concern of judges that while the prospect of compen-
sation for, say, a broken leg may inhibit recuperation 
to a minor degree, the prospect of compensation for 
grief would have a much more powerful disincentive 
to rehabilitation and one which medical evidence 
would find extremely difficult to unravel from the 
original condition?" If a central factor in grief and 
depression is anger, might not the adversarial nature 
_ __of-legal process be especially counter-productive? 
Associated with this concern is the very real one of 
characterising the relevant actionable damage. We 
are told that pathological grief is compensatable (so 
long as it satisfies the above artificial relational etc. 
requirements) but not normal grief. Leaving aside the 
perplexing question of why this is so, we are still 
confronted by the possibility that with hindsight and 
in the context of a civil claim, medical opinion may 
define 'pathological grief much more loosely than 
the law would find tolerable. After all, the boundary 
between normal and pathological grief is of virtually 
no significance for medical treatment. 
So the corners about recovery for nervous shock 
are real, but the available techniques for controlling 
it are not only artificial but bring the law into dis-
repute. That at _present claims can turn on the  
requirement of 'close ties of love and affection' is 
- 
guaranteed to produce outrage.  Is it  • ot a disrep 
-atebta-stgirt'to-see_bratheKof Hills 	
:- 
, 
tiirned- 	
no more than broth- 
-arty-lore
victim? In  h
GT—
re cases will it  
not lif
.__
.,tesqueith.11,a_sa iiit
a.tylitrabblini.  to 
-Ii2.21.:-
hei
_r_16
spe-Olg love for 	
der_ta  
ceased 
win mone 	
ages an or e 
ends  t to have to 
 
atrSEFffiI argument? Moreover, most other feasible 
control devices which might be used instead of 'ties 
of love' would still turn on the status of the plaintiff 
and so produce the same unseemly arguments over 
meaningless boundaries. 	
• 
Some US jurisdictions who had once recognised a 
tort relating to privacy have now abolished it 
because it was felt that no reasonable boundaries for 
the cause of action could be found, and this was an 
embarrassment to the law." Should not our courts 
upkeep of 'unwanted' children." But a class of 
claims which even more obviously offends this prin- 
ciple is that concerning nervous shock. It is no small 
irony that the area of nervous shock is both the best 
historical example of incremental development and 
yet also the area where the silliest rules now exist 
and where criticism is almost universal...L=140 
Oliver dues not think thijimhere_is=legically-defen- 
siN4.74 A popular but obvious criticism of tite_rela:___  
tional, sliatiar and sensory reanirements  for the 
existence of a duty of care with respect to nervous 
sh 	
w--T'
esen sme-qua-non fac- 
tors to the causation of the actionable damage. Ner-
ous shock, pathologic gr
arn
if, ps3-inT----
iiatric illness or 
however this damage is best described does not only 
occur to those with tight ties of affection to_taAig-
tiza inilaiiiiaziyitirtmi-ded sense the injured victim at 
the time of injury or near enou 	
e
AlET-01-7
e er.  3  Ner- 
vous shock can afflict other sorts of people in other 
circumstances and can do so foreseeably. Drawing a 
line between the cases of pathological grief now 
recoverable and pathological grief caused by, say, the 
sudden shock of being told of a brother's grisly death 
and then dwelling upon it, has nothing to do with 
foreseeability. A brother may foreseeably suffer such 
a fate even though he has no special or indeed any 
particular tie of affection to his deceased brother. 
What is going on in these rules is simply a line-
drawing exercise. 
The first question is why is it thought that a line 
must be drawn more tightly than the class of foresee-
able victims? In the past there was a fear that approx-
imating nervous shock to other forms of physical loss 
so that the duty was 'self evident' if the loss was 
foreseeable would generate far too many claims. This 
is now unpopular as a modern rationale of nervous 
shock limitations." This is because, inter alia, it is 
thought that medical data on the condition suggests 
it is not common.' But the real root of concern may 
be that appellate courts suspect, and with reason it 
seems to me, that once a general duty to avoid ner-
vous shock was recognised, many more individuals 
would be recognised as presenting the relevant 
symptoms to their GPs. Recovery from grief is a corn- 
• P. Glazebrook, 'Unseemliness Compounded by Injustice' 
119921 Carob. C.). 226. The reformulation of the damage as eco-
nomic loss rather than of life (as in McKay v. Essex Area 
Health Authority 11982) Q.B. 1166) does little to mask the 
problem. 
• Alcock v. Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police 
11991) 4 All E.R. 907,932 (H.L.). Other critics include, S. Ned-
ley, 'Hillborough—Morbid Musings of a Reasonable Chief Con-
stable' 119921 Carob. L.J. 16; B. Lynch, 'A Victory for 
Pragmatism? Nervous Shock Reconsidered (1992) 108 L.Q.R. 
367, 370; H. Toff, 'Liability for Psychiatric Illness After Hills-
borough' (1992) 12 0.J.L.S. 440, 441.  
" Toff, op. cit. 
'e See e.g., the speeches in McLoughin v. O'Brien 119821 2 
All E.R. 298 (H.L.). 
• Teff, op. cit. 
' Note that (1) this argument is not the same as a fear of 
fraudulent claims, and (2) that Lord Bridge noted that the logi-
cal deduction from this concern was to wipe out liability for 
pure nervous shock—the reform argued for here. 
• D. Bedingfield, 'Privacy or Publicity? The Enduring Con-
fusion Surrounding the American Tort of Invasion of Privacy' 
(1992) 55 M.L.R. 111, 112. 
95 
In Restraint of Tort 
wipe out recovery for pure nervous shock on the 
same basis?" 
4. A Few Ideas for Future Movement of Doc-
trine 
(a) When should anticipatory claims be allowed? 
The plaintiff suing in defamation does not have to 
prove any actual damage to reputation: the plaintiff 
need not find a friend who will testify that he now 
thinks less of the plaintiff. One way of looking at this 
fact is that the law is seeking to avoid just the sort of 
humiliating forensic spectacle it is at present ensur-
ing in nervous shock cases. But another way of 
seeing the absence of a damage-to-reputation require-
ment in defamation is that the law regards the inter-
est threatened by the defendant's conduct as so 
precious that it penalises even mere threats to its 
integrity for the sake of deterrence. Yet another rea-
son the law might choose to allow claims before any 
conventional type of damage has been suffered is in 
order to allow the plaintiff to mitigate his loss. This 
was the quite rational driving force behind the liabil-
ity on builders for property which presented 'an 
imminent threat to health and safety'." It also would 
support claims in the future by, for example, those 
exposed to excessive radiation in hospitals. The cate-
gories of actionable damage are not closed." Just as 
we may choose in future to wipe out recovery for 
nervous shock, courts may choose to recognise cer-
tain categories of exposure to risk as actionable per 
se (i.e. recognition that the 'loss of the chance' of 
avoiding the threatened outcome was actionable 
'damage'). Of course an unbridled recognition of 
such a form of 'damage' as actionable has over-
whelming arguments against it. Some sort of qualifi-
cation is needed otherwise everyone living near 
SeMeld could sue for their increased risk of 
leukemia, bringing the whole system of civil obliga-
tions into public ridicule." But in some cases the 
mitigation argument is very strong. In the US, those 
" If in a case where statute barred room for manoeuvre Lord 
Reid was moved to complain that 'the common law ought 
never to produce a wholly unreasonable result . .", Cartledge 
v. E. lopling & Sons Ltd. 119631 A.C. 758, 772), how much more 
forceful is that complaint here where no statute obstructs ratio-
nal reform. 
8' Anna v. Merton London Borough Council 119781 A.C. 728. 
60  Hotson v. East Berkshire Area Health Authority 119871 1 
All ER. 210, 217 (per Sir John Donaldson KR.): 'I can see no 
reason why the categories of loss should be closed either'. 
" As well as having dramatic side-effects in limitation 
law—potentially barring claims later brought when a person 
did actually contract leukemia. This has a parallel in the recog-
nition that 'acquisition of defective property' claims are really 
ones concerning economic loss—the defendant can use this 
characterization of what is the actionable 'damage' to argue 
that the claim is statute barred. See J. Stapleton, 'The Gist of 
negligently exposed to x-rays can sometimes recover 
damages under the label of 'damages for the cost of 
medical surveillance' where the surveillance will 
pick up cancers early enough to limit their impact. 
Moreover in the current dramatic situation involving 
defective Bjork-Shiley heart valves (a quarter of 
which are defective and will fail catastrophically 
without warning"), the law might be brought into 
considerable disrepute were it to insist that the 
recipients 'wait and see' before they (or rather their 
estates) could sue. In other words there may be some 
class of anticipatory claims which, although specula-
tive (not all recipients of such damages would even-
tually suffer the deleterious outcome), may be 
justified, and to this extent the future may see a re-
embrace of the broad concern underlying the deci-
sion in Anns. 
(b) Ranking types of loss; private profit 
A vigorous common law might also in the future 
draw out distinctions within certain categories of 
actionable damage. In the twentieth century, Parlia-
ment has been sensitive to the greater social concern 
generated by personal injuries relative to property 
damage," and within property damage to the greater 
concern where a person's dwelling is affected." 
Might not these sorts of considerations be given more 
prominence and definition in future common law 
doctrine? 
Similarly there is in both parliamentary enact-
ments and certain areas of the common law a distinc-
tion drawn between defendants who act in the 
course of a business and others." A common law 
which seeks to be responsive to social concerns and 
distinctions may choose to develop this idea more 
explicitly. In the future, therefore, we might want to 
see such a factor enter into the determination of 
whether a particular plaintiff should be able to sue a 
particular defendant and on what basis. This is not 
simply the issue of protecting certain public activi-
ties such as those of the police and local authorities 
Negligence, Part 1(19881 104 L.Q.R. 213, 236 and Nitrigin 
Eireann Teoranta v. Inca Alloys Ltd. 119921 I W.L.R. 498. The 
same construction is probably true of a claim that a defective 
herbicide was ineffective so that the crop is more vulnerable to 
weeds. 
By 1992 there had been 470 recorded failures of this heart 
valve (43 in the UK) with fatal results in two-thirds of cases (33 
in the UK): Prob. Liab. Internat. [March 19921 38. See also The 
Guardian. 3.12.92. 
" e.g. Limitation Act 1980, s. 33; Occupiers' Liability Act 
1984 sl. (9); Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 s. 2 (1). 
" e.g. Defective Premises Act 1972. 
" See e.g., Sale of Goods Act 1979; Unfair Contract Terms 
Act 1977; Consumer Protection Act 1987. This argument is 
developed in detail under the term 'moral enterprise liability' 
in Stapleton, Product Liability, op. cit.. Chapter 8. 
96 
Jane Stapleton 
4 
(see above), but of developing a distinction between, 
say, one who advises, feeds or carries another in pur-
suit of financial gain and one who does so without 
that motivation. It might be, for example, that some-
time in the future the vicarious liability of employers 
for the acts of employees in the course of employ-
ment will evolve into a personal but strict liability of 
employers for injuries caused in this way. Certainly 
UK courts are hostile to employers relying on their 
former common law entitlement to seek an indem-
nity from the tortfeasor-employee, and such reliance 
is now rare. Indeed, so settled in some countries 'is 
the consensus that this is a just arrangement that 
there is a growing momentum to remove formally the 
personal liability of the employee in line with this 
practice." One relevant application of this idea 
might resolve the problematic basis of Richcliff's lia-
bility in Gran Gelato" because Richcliff's 'vicarious 
liability' would be replaced by a personal strict lia-
bility imposed on defendants for acts done by their 
employees and agents acting in pursuit of the defen-
dant's profit." 
5. Interaction of torts inter se and with other 
causes of action; recourse actions 
In the recognition of a tort obligation it can be rele-
vant to consider issues of the maintenance of the 
integrity of another area of the law and the availabil-
ity in another area of law of a preferable technique of 
protection. Both these issues are present for example 
in the recent cases involving negligent solicitors and 
wills. The rule that a testator's clear changed wishes 
cannot override an existing valid will means that the 
newly favoured parties will lose out unless a new 
will is executed (and even then they will only have 
an expectation not an entitlement). When the execu-
tion is delayed by the negligence of the testator's 
solicitor and the testator dies, there is a problem for 
the law." The victim of the negligence is clearly the 
favoured party, but he or she is a stranger to the rele-
vant dealings and may be completely oblivious of 
them. Fashioning protection for the victim in tort 
while also allowing the solicitor and client to be free 
to fashion their own relationship is therefore tricky. 
A less tricky alternative is relaxing the privity 
" J. Fleming, The Law of Torts, 8th ed. (Sydney, Law Book 
Co. 1992) 367-8. 
" Cane, op. cit. On the other hand, on reading this draft 
paper Cane asks could the 'learned intermediary' analysis be 
apglied to 
A rationale 
s 
  
solicitor? 
which would not then apply to the conduct of 
the independent contractor (the surveyor) in Smith v. Bush. 
White v. Jones (19931 3 All E.R. 481 (CA.); (1903) 109 
L.Q.R. 344 (casenote by J. G. Fleming); HL appeal heard 
7.3.94-14.3.94. See also Ross v. Counters (19801 Ch. 297. 
92  On which see The Law Commission, Privily of Contract: 
requirement for suing on the solicitor/client contract 
on the ground that it was clearly for the benefit of the 
third party favoured beneficiary." For example, the 
solicitor and client might agree that the solicitor 
would assign the work to an inexperienced articled 
clerk who would take considerably longer to process 
the work than would be reasonable for an ordinary 
solicitor. The client may have secured a considerable 
reduction in fee as a result. It is clear that when 
faced with a claim by the newly favoured party after 
the testator dies the law would not want to ignore 
this fact. Yet how can this best be done? If the claim 
is brought in tort how could the concern about the 
client—solicitor agreement be taken into account 
given that the plaintiff may be a stranger to it? 
Already we have seen that the agenda of countervail-
ing factors against tort protection should include 
hostility to a plaintiff who is trying to use tort to 
evade an arrangement he or she had agreed to, but 
that factor would not be an adequate control here 
because the plaintiff may have been a stranger to the 
client—solicitor arrangement. Similarly trying to fash-
ion the control in terms of what the defendant had 
expected his obligations to the testator to be smacks 
of the privity fallacy. It is hard to see how a suitable 
countervailing factor could be constructed in tort to 
handle this situation, short of an awkward special 
exception." A much more satisfactory technique 
would be to fashion the relevant protection of the 
newly favoured party out of the client's contractual 
entitlement which would not only enable the reason 
for protection of an apparently unconnected plaintiff 
to be evident but would also bring with it the 
required limitations of that protection, including the 
common sense decision by Judge Moseley Q.C. to 
deny a duty of care to a disappointed beneficiary 
under a negligently drafted inter vivos transaction 
(where the settlor had subsequently changed his 
mind)." In short, these wills cases suggest a fufther 
countervailing factor against tort liability: would a 
non-tort avenue of protection be more suitable. 
Next, the current keenness of appellate courts to 
confine negligence liability has had the disturbing 
side-effect of subordinating and hence distorting its 
principles in relation to other causes of action. Thus 
the Court of Appeal has asserted's that a referee has 
Contracts for the Benefit of Third Parties, Consultative Paper 
No. 12 (London, HMSO, 1991). 
" The position is different if the plaintiff had had dealings 
with a relevant party (see above discussion of linear liability in 
tort). 
" Hemmens v. Wilson Brown, The Times, 30.6.93. 
" Spring v. Guardian Assurance plc. 119931 2 All ER. 273 
(C.A.); HL appeal heard 29.11.93-30.11.93. See also Patch v. 
Gomrs of Customs and Excise (CA.), The Times, 4.3.93 and 
compare Lonrho plc. v. Fayed (No. 5), The Times, 27.7.93 
(CA). 
97 
In Restraint of Tort 
no duty in negligence to the subject of the reference 
because defamation (and specifically the defence of 
qualified privilege) covers the field. That is, a negli-
gence claim is denied on the ground that otherwise a 
defence available in another tort would be 
'bypassed'. Yet at almost the same time the Court of 
Appeal in the Cambridge Water" case held that 
another claim (for physical loss) can succeed even 
though the defendant had acted with reasonable care 
and so had a complete answer to a claim in the tort 
of negligence. 
Spring imperils many of the professional misstate-
ment precedents" and is almost certainly wrongly 
decided. The idea of a defence covering the field is 
bizarre if we see different civil obligations as 
responding to different and perhaps overlapping 
interests of the plaintiff. Moreover, in Spring there 
was no attempt to argue that the defendant in a 
defamation suit should be able to resist it by claim-
ing he had acted carefully (and so would have an 
answer to a negligence claim which answer would be 
bypassed by the imposition of strict liability in 
defamation). To judge a plaintiffs claim against the 
defendant by whether the defendant has an answer 
to a different claim is to fall into the same trap as 
those who championed the privity fallacy: that we 
must not in determining causes of action disturb the 
expectations of security a defendant may have 
acquired from his being safe from a claim under a 
different cause of action. As we have seen, there may 
be legitimate reasons why we might choose to chan-
nel civil obligations, but protecting defendant's 
expectations is not one of them. 
The Court of Appeal decision in Spring was an ill-
thought out attempt to rein in one tort, that is negli-
gence, and subordinate it to another, that is 
defamation. It may well be desirable that negligence 
(or tort as a whole or perhaps like equity") be kept 
in reserve—and the recognition of the requirement 
that plaintiffs have no other feasible appropriate 
means of protection as a precondition of tort's assis-
tance is a reflection of this. But that does not imply 
that its form should be distorted by the outlines of 
alternative claims for protection which have been 
unsuccessful because the defendant had an answer 
to them. 
Cambridge Water Co. v. Eastern Counties Leather plc. 
(C.A.), (19941 1 All ER. 53 but see 63 (reversal by HL).. 
Starting with the recognition of a duty of care in the con-
text of a financial reference in Hedley Byrne (which may be 
wrong on other grounds—see earlier text). 
''''' Chandler v. Kerley 119781 2 All E.R. 942, 945: 'the role of 
equity is supplementary and supportive', per Lord Scarman. 
See also Samoan General Contracting Co. v. Pilkington Glass 
Ltd. (No. 2) [19881 1 All E.R. 791, 804: 'Just as equity remedied 
the inadequacies of the common law, so has the law of torts 
98 
Cambridge Water involved a claim about contami-
nated ground water. Whether the plaintiff's claim was 
seen as one of nuisance or Rylands v. Fletcher,' the 
Court of Appeal decision seemed clearly wrong. This 
was not because the defendant had a defence in a dif-
ferent tort (negligence), but because the parallel 
defence (of due care) should have been accorded to the 
defendant in those causes of action on which the 
plaintiff was relying.'" But this is not the limit of the 
interest in the case. If we do not intend to irradicate 
strict liability completely from the law of obliga-
tions'" (and the strict nature of many contractual obli-
gations makes this unlikely) cases such as Cambridge 
Water raise a much more fundamental question. Let us 
suppose that a plaintiff in a particular cause of action 
is unequivocally entitled to the protection of a strict 
obligation. Because the interconnectedness of much 
human activity has become apparent and the duty of 
care in negligence has come to be applied to many 
more types of conduct than previously, it is now much 
more likely that there is some other party whose con-
duct may be implicated in the causation of the rele-
vant injury and whose conduct may be regarded as 
careless. This means it is now more likely that the 
strictly obliged defendant will have some 'careless' 
party against whom to seek recourse. 
A plaintiff is usually interested in pursuing com-
pensation in the easiest and most secure way, and 
not interested in ensuring that the liability costs 
eventually land on the party or parties which the law 
may regard as most appropriate. One feature of a sys-
tem of joint and several liability, itself designed to 
ease the plaintiffs pursuit of compensation, is that 
the preferred target of the plaintiff's claim is often 
the wrongdoer with the deepest pocket. But the fact 
that the law holds some parties to strict obligations 
and some only to obligations of care suggests that 
there are different moral and/or economic norms at 
work. This would seem to necessitate in any system 
of joint and several liability that a defendant should, 
prima facie, have access to a recourse action against 
other wrongdoers."' In other words the very phe-
nomenon of strict and fault based liabilities which 
are joint and several suggests that the law has more 
than an interest in compensating plaintiffs in certain 
circumstances—it seems also to be interested in 
filled the gaps left by other cases of action where the interests 
of justice so required' per Bingham, L.J. 
Rylands v. Fletcher (1866) L.R. 1 Ex. 265; (1868) L.R. 3 
H.L. 330 (H.L.). 
In accordance with modern attitudes to such claims: T. 
Weir, 'The Polluter Must Pay—Regardless' 119931 C.L.J. 17, 19. 
The origin of the strictness of contractual obligations is, 
to some extent, obscure—see Stapleton, Product. op. cit., 2.02. 
Contrast T. Weir, Torts, Vol. XI of International Encyclo-
pedia of Comparative Law (Mouton, The Hague, 1976), 58-9. 
Jane Stapleton 
ranking the behaviour of defendants. To allow the 
whole liability load to rest on one party by virtue of a 
factor (the whim of the plaintiff's choice, the deep 
pocket of certain defendants) which is not built into 
the basis of liability seems inconsistent with such a 
ranking. The law seems to have an interest, not only 
in compensating suitable plaintiffs but also, once 
this is accomplished, in enabling the liability costs to 
be allocated between all those liable to the plaintiff 
in a way which reflects some moral or economic 
pecking order of liabilities inter se. 
The theoretical and notorious problem' here is 
what should the rules governing recourse look like? 
In every likelihood the concerns of the law will be 
different in respect of the claim by the plaintiff from 
its concerns in relation to recourse claims between 
liable parties. For example, any pragmatic argument 
of easing plaintiff's proof problems disappears at the 
recourse stage. The Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 
1978 contemplates contribution/indemnity between 
parties whose liability with respect to the damage is 
based on breaches of different duties (see s. 6(1)), for 
example, negligence, breach of contract and breach 
of statutory duties. But how should apportionment 
proceed in such cases—causation, blameworthiness, 
a combination of both these and/or other factors? 
Does the negligence principle, for example, swamp 
whatever basis and goals lie beneath the other liabil-
ity rules under which non-negligent parties have 
been held liable, so that the latter are justified in 
claiming a full indemnity from the former?' While 
this accords with the formal attitude to the vicari-
ously liable employer (who is technically entitled to 
a fall indemnity from the negligent tortfeasor-
employee), there is no general clear authority for the 
proposition that the negligent party should indem-
nity the strictly liable party. Indeed, many commen-
tators argue that there is caselaw running the other 
way showing that blameworthiness in not the sole 
criterion under the 1978 Act.' Of course, the 
courts' decree of apportionment (not indemnity) in 
such caselaw might be rationalized by an implicit 
finding of some sort of fault or carelessness on the 
part of the 'strictly liable' party; but it may not be. 
The courts may be attempting to give weight to the 
bases of the relevant strict liability, including the rel-
ative causal potency of those liable.' In other 
words, the task of apportionment here inevitably 
requires the court to elaborate on the notion of 
'responsibility' in the apportionment legislation and, 
in so doing, to speculate about and rank the policy 
objectives thought to underlie the different legal 
It may be, or course, that in recourse actions most 
courts would simply always give sole weight to the 
negligence principle allowing full indemnity against 
the negligent party. But if so, this would have pro-
found implications for the theoretical basis of civil 
obligations. It would mean that whatever mix of ele-
gant moral, economic or pragmatic ideas was used to 
justify the initial strict liability of parties to victims, 
they would be eclipsed at the recourse stage by the 
negligence paradigm. Thus, whatever the given ratio-
nale of a strict liability may be, it would amount to 
no more in practice than a facade for the real basis of 
the strict liability—the pragmatic one of facilitating 
the plaintiff's suit—because this defendant would 
eventually be entitled to shift all responsibility on to 
the negligent party. The phenomenon of strict liabil-
ity would support no more than this pragmatic ratio-
male save in those very rare cases where no human 
negligence could, by any device, be said to have been 
involved in the relevant injury. Modern theories of 
civil obligation have yet to tackle this fundamental 
problem, which has implications for the hierarchy of 
norms reflected in differeht causes of action not only 
in the area of multiple wrongdoers but also in cases 
such as Spring and Cambridge Water. 
The problem for theory is exacerbated by two fac-
tors in practice. First, as we have seen, the more the 
inter-connectedness of conduct is perceived and the 
wider the reach of negligence law becomes (espe-
cially its expansion in the area of failure to cohtrol 
third parties), the more parties become potential tar-
gets for claims and thereby involved in recourse 
determinations. Secondly, lawyers acting for plain-
tiffs seem to be becoming (perhaps due to the 
increased fear of malpractice claims) more assiduous 
T. Hervey, '"Responsibility" under the Civil Liability 
(Contribution) Act 1978' [1979] New Law J. 509; G. Williams, 
Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence (London, Stevens & 
Sons, 1951) 160. 
'" Certainly Glanville Williams thought this should be the 
case, op. cit. 160. See also W. Landes and R. Posner, 'Joint and 
Multiple Tortfeasors: An Economic Analysis' (19801 9 J. Leg. 
Studs, 517 553, but contrast J. Phillips, 'Contribution and 
Indemnity in Products Liability' (1974) 42 Tenn. L.R. 85, 
102-3. 
Hervey (1979) op. cit., 510; M. Brazier, Street on Torts,  
8th ed. (London. Butterworths, 1988) 532, citing cases which 
appear to hold that the negligence of a co-tortfeasor does not 
necessarily relieve a strictly liable defendant completely. Com-
pare Tennant Radiant Heat Ltd. v. Warrington Devel Corp. 
[19681 I E.G.L.R. 41 (CA.), see below. 
e.g. Moths v. Ford Motor Co. 11973] Q.B. 792. 
Certainly, as between a strictly liable landlord and care-
less tenant, the Court of Appeal recently preferred to deal with 
their claim and counterclaim (not a recourse claim) as 'a prob-
lem of causation' alone: Tennant Radiant Heat Ltd. v. Warring-
ton Dave! Corp. [1988] 1 E.G.L.R. 41 (CA.), 44 (Dillon, L.).). 
99 
In Restraint of Tort 
••• 
in pleading an exhaustive list of possible alternative 
causes of action;' so the list of causes of action per 
defendant which need to be considered at the 
recourse stage can be considerable. Of course we 
could mask the problem which arises at the recourse 
stage if we abolish joint and several liability, as some 
jurisdictions in the United States have partially done 
in order to protect 'deep pocket' defendants, in par-
ticular public authorities. But this would have clear 
disadvantages for plaintiffs. Alternatively even more 
favour could be shown to plaintiffs than joint and 
several liability affords them, for example, as in the 
Netherlands where in a recent case the Supreme 
Court held that a plaintiff injured by a generic prod-
uct (diethylstilbestrol) can sue any or all manufactur-
ers of such a product jointly and severally, and only 
at the recourse stage can the individual manufacturer 
argue the market share doctrine to reduce liability to 
its proportion of the market in that generic prod-
uct.' 
In practice however, the whole field of contribu-
tion and indemnity is conveniently shrouded in 
mystery because of the tendency for out-of-court set-
tlements on the issue to be subject to secrecy 
clauses—as in the Hillsborough football disaster;"°  
by the failure of past courts to attempt to address 
these issues; their omission to set out clear reasons 
for their decisions; and the virtual absence of appel-
late litigation on the issues. Ideally, law should illu-
minate not only who the plaintiff can sue under a 
rule and why, but who should ultimately bear the 
relevant loss and why. That the basis of civil liabili-
ties and their relative ranking in importance can be 
buried in recourse actions so successfully without 
comment by most observers supports the allegation 
that it is law's facade which is important, not its final 
allocation of loss. 
5. Conclusion 
Current criticism of the state of tort law can be 
resolved into two forms: that which takes a political 
line and boils down simply to a complaint about the 
House of Lord's conservative vision for the overall 
reach of tort protection; and that which concerns the 
'°" Even where liability is admitted as in A.B. and Others v. 
South West Water Services Ltd. 119931 1 All E.R. 609. (A case 
which shows the naivety of the argument that the E.C. Directive 
on Products Liability would make life simpler for plaintiffs.) 
H.R. 9.10.92, Rwd. W. 219 (compare Sindell v. Abbott 
Laboratories (1980) 607 P. 2d. 924). On the argument that a 
defendant should only be allowed recourse against another 
party if they had been acting in the course of a business, see 
Stapleton. Product Liability , op. cit., Chapter 11. 
'" The Independent, 9.10.90. 
" Lord Goff of Chieveley, Judge, Jurist and Legislature (The 
Child & Co., Oxford Lecture, 1986) 11. 
processes by which decisions are taken. I have con-
centrated here on the latter. Just as, in Lord Goff's 
words 'piecemeal legislation may exercise a distort-
ing effect on the law'1" so too can the ad hockery 
implicit in the Caparo 'pre-judged pocket' approach 
to new cases. Very recently we have seen courts 
struggling to rationalise quite sensible outcomes 
within the constraints of this type of thinking.' 
Now a clearer approach is needed. 
We might at first be tempted to rely on the fashion-
able new theories of tort liability developed (nearly 
all in the US) to combat the collectivist arguments of 
the late 1960s." But these new theories do not help. 
Nearly all only focus on two of the complex con-
stituents of any cause of action: the standard of the 
defendant's behaviour (fault or strict liability); and 
causation. No analysis here of why the law does or 
should have a different attitude to economic loss; 
how to rank different bases of liability; or whether 
legislative emphasis in certain areas (personal 
injuries, dwellings, conduct in the course of a busi-
ness etc.) should legitimately be reflected in the 
direction to be taken in the common law.' More-
over, there is a substantial amount of terminological 
confusion in this theoretical debate. Key language is 
used in quite different ways—particularly the idea of 
'strict liability'. The effects of a law (for example, 
compensation, self-insurance) are often elided with 
its goals. An ideological bias is also not uncommon: 
this is exemplified by the assertion of 'back to con-
tract' theorists, that virtually all important transac-
tions are consensual (or potentially consensual). 
Next we might be persuaded to rely heavily on a 
study of comparative law. Recently there has been 
much criticism of the alleged 'parochialism'' of the 
current British judicial scene. In recent commen-
taries on both Murphy and Norsk sharp criticism has 
been made of the Law Lords' failure to analyse the 
comparative precedents from other jurisdictions. At 
its most diplomatic this criticism takes the form of 
bemoaning the limitations on the House of Lords 
working in 'physically crammed conditions with 
minimal library facilities and non-existent research 
assistance'.' I have no doubt appellate judges are 
overworked and need more time to read and reflect 
Cook v. Square D. Ltd. 119921 I.C.R. 262 (C.A.); Kho-
rasandjion v. Bush [19931 3 All E.R. 669 (C.A.). 
I. Englard, 'The System Builders: A Critical Appraisal of 
Modem Tort Theory' (1980) 9 J.L.S. 27. To the economic theo-
ries (by Calabresi, Posner and Alan Schwartz) and ethical theo-
ries (of Weinrib, Epstein and Honore) should now be added 
books by). Coleman, Risks and Wrongs (Cambridge, Cambridge 
Univ. Press, 1992); and I. Englard, The Philosophy of Tort Law 
(Aldershot, Dartmouth, 1993). 
" For other examples, see T. Weir (19921 CI.). 388. 389. 
"' See e.g., Fleming (1993) op. cit. 74. 
"a B. Markesinis, 109 L.Q.R. 5, 6. 
100 
Jane Stapleton 
on the complex matters which come before them. 
But the strength of judicial reasoning comes not from 
the citation and analysis, thesis-like, of a range of 
responses from other jurisdictions to the issue at 
hand. The most powerful and convincing judgments 
are those which spell out basic principles and 
explain their application to the specific case in a 
clear manner. 
The way forward lies in thinking clearly about the 
reasons both for and against helping the plaintiff. 
Here I concentrated on the latter, the separate consid-
eration of the countervailing factors which militate 
against the imposition of tort liability. This may 
require, at the most abstract level, a rethinking of our 
basic ideas of what tort law is for and some of these 
will certainly be found wanting. Take for example the 
common cliche that the tort of negligence is about 
compensation. Quite apart from the fact that only a 
tiny fraction of those many people injured by negli-
gence sue and recover in tort, this description is sim-
ply inadequate to convey what is the 'meat' of 
negligence law, which is the analysis of the bound-
aries of the tort which explain why only some victims 
of negligence are allowed to recover compensation. In 
this sense, a re-emphasis on the countervailing factors 
which weigh against the protection of tort is at least as 
appropriate and useful as the Anns strategy which in 
effect, was interpreted as asking 'why not' as a periph-
eral afterthought to the duty analysis. 
In rethinking what tort law should be for in this 
broad sense we may choose in future to shift empha-
sis in a major way, for example by putting greater 
weight on prevention and on preventative remedies. 
In the future perhaps tort law should develop greater 
use of injunctive relief. We have already seen this 
recently in the novel case of Khorasandjian v. 
Bush"' which may and should herald, not the fatal 
unravelling of the property requirement in private 
nuisance, but the long overdue (albeit covert) birth of 
new tort of harrassment. But we might also want to 
see injunctive relief developed in other areas, for 
example, to give those threatened with personal 
injuries by the continuing conduct of defendants (for 
example, their employer) some effective remedy. 
There may, of course, be some areas in which tort 
will only rarely be able to operate successfully, even 
symbolically. One such field is that of toxic torts: the 
embarrassing sight of the Benefield litigants squab-
bling over the meaning of 'soft' statistics is the best 
current example of how tort law is inadequate here, 
even as a symbol of justice. Nevertheless in many 
"7  Khorasandfian v. Bush 119931 3 All E.R. 669 (CA.). 
"8 See e.g., T. Weir, 'Governmental Liability' 119891 Public 
Law 40. On the general point, note that H. L. A. Hart includes 
other areas the potential role of tort for signalling 
important social values remains substantial. 
This paper's main suggestions as to how tort law 
might be restrained within coherent boundaries may 
be summarised as follows: 
1. The strategy of searching for a relevant 
'pocket' of caselaw at the outset of the duty 
analysis should be replaced with an analysis 
based on arguments for liability and on an 
agenda of countervailing factors to the impo-
sition of tort liability which have been explic-
itly constructed from policy concerns. 
2. 
More attention needs to be paid to under-
standing the complexity of and limitations to 
the pro-liability side of the duty equation. 
3. 
With regard to the no-liability side of the 
equation, the following are not convincing 
countervailing arguments to the imposition of 
tort liability: 
(a) that the imposition of tort liability 
might have a large socio-economic and 
redistributive impact; 
(b) that the plaintiff or defendant has or 
could have obtained insurance; 
(c) that 'warranties of quality' are necessar-
ily the province of contract; 
(d) that the defendant has a defence to a 
different cause of action; 
(e) that to impost tort liability would dis-
turb the defendant's expectations. 
4. 
The agenda of countervailing concerns 
should include: 
(a) that the imposition of liability might 
produce a specific unattractive socio-
economic impact (such as severely 
depleting local government finances'18); 
(b) that a linear arrangement of obligations 
is preferable in the area in order, for 
example, to shield peripheral deep-
pocketed parties and/or to control the 
problem of multiple causation; 
(c) that the plaintiff had adequate and 
appropriate alternative means of protec-
tion; 
(d) that the plaintiff may be seeking to use 
tort as a means to evade an understand-
tag as to where the risk would fall; 
(e) that to assist the plaintiff would bring 
the law into disrepute and injure its dig-
nity; 
in his version of an agenda of countervailing factors that the 
imposition of liability might 'unduly hamper enterprise'. The 
Concept of Law (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 19611 162. 
101 
In Restraint of Tort 
(f) that a more convincing and doctrinally 
convenient form in which to deliver 
protection to the plaintiff exists in 
another field of law. 
4. The following issues may play a role in the 
future direction of tort and so deserve more 
consideration: 
(a) 
the accommodation within the tort anal-
ysis of the phenomenon of a plaintiff's 
prior acceptance of where the risk 
would lie; 
(b) 
the degree to which tort law in future 
should provide incentives to prevent or 
mitigate harm; 
the degree to which tort law should dis-
tinguish types of physical harm 
the degree to which tort law should dis-
tinguish conduct in pursuit of financial 
profit and other forms of conduct. 
the interaction of torts inter se and of 
tort with other causes of action, both in 
claims by plaintiffs and in recourse 
claims. 
102 
