1
Introduction
Two incompatible conceptions of the law of torts are discernible within the com-
mon law.¹ The ﬁrst, and probably dominant, conception is that the defendant
should be liable where he is at fault for causing the claimant loss unless there is
a good reason why not. This model dominates liability for negligence. Lord
Wilberforce in Anns v Merton London Borough Council² set out a two stage test for
the existence of a duty of care which is the classic statement of this approach.³ The
ﬁrst limb of this test is that the defendant could have reasonably foreseen that his
negligence would cause the claimant loss. This adds nothing to the principle that a
defendant cannot be liable for negligence unless he is at fault in relation to the harm
suffered by the claimant. This has caused some to conclude that the concept of a
‘duty of care’ is redundant.⁴ The second limb enables any considerations which
ought to negative the duty to be taken into account. This could encompass every
reason imaginable for denying liability. For example, imposing liability on the
police for carelessly failing to catch criminals may be thought to create a perverse
incentive to be excessively diligent in obtaining convictions;⁵ or imposing liability
on a judge for the careless conduct of a trial may undermine the ﬁnality of dispute
resolution;⁶ or holding the auditor of a company liable for the losses suffered by all
those who invested in that company on the basis of carelessly prepared accounts
would be to impose liability of indeterminate scope and amount.⁷
The House of Lords made a great deal of their abandonment of Lord
Wilberforce’s two stage test and its substitution with a three stage test: (1) was the
claimant’s loss as a result of the defendant’s negligence reasonably foreseeable?
(2) was there a relationship of proximity? (3) would imposing liability be fair, just,
¹ E Weinrib ‘The Disintegration of Duty’ in M Madden (ed) Exploring Tort Law (2005) 143.
² [1978] AC 728 (HL).
³ [1978] AC 728 at 751 (HL).
⁴ OW Holmes ‘The Path of Law’ (1897) 10 HL Rev 457 at 471–72; P Winﬁeld ‘Duties in
Tortious Negligence’ (1934) 34 Col L Rev 41; W Buckland ‘The Duty to Take Care’ (1935) 51 LQR
637; J Stone The Province and Function of Law (1946) 181–82; B Hepple ‘Negligence: The Search
for Coherence’ (1997) 50 CLP 69. Compare Bourhill v Young [1943] AC 92 (HL) and Palsgraf v Long
Island Railroad Co 248 NY 339, 162 NE 99.
⁵ Hill v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [1989] AC 53 (HL). The Guildford Four and Birmingham
Six cases show that the concern not to apply pressure on the police to obtain convictions and thereby
encourage ‘excessive diligence’ is not a fanciful one.
⁶ Sirros v Moore [1975] QB 118 (CA).
⁷ Caparo Industries plc v Dickman [1990] 2 AC 605 (HL).
Torts and Rights. Robert Stevens.
© Oxford University Press 2007. Published 2007 by Oxford University Press.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/11718/chapter/160690303 by Lancaster University user on 21 September 2023
and reasonable?⁸ However, the underlying approach is essentially the same. The
ﬁrst stage is otiose, whilst the second and third stages collapse into a search for the
good reasons which can be given for denying liability. (Can something be fair
whilst unjust? Unreasonable but fair?)
On this conception ‘the overall object of tort law is to deﬁne cases in which the
law may justly hold one party liable to compensate another’.⁹ Within liability for
negligence ‘damage is the gist’,¹⁰ and where there is no recovery for negligently
inﬂicted loss it needs justiﬁcation. Under this model, the role of the ‘duty of care’
in liability for negligence is as a ‘control device,’¹¹ primarily concerned with the
diverse reasons why a particular defendant has an immunity from being liable for
carelessly causing loss.¹² This conception of the law of torts I shall call the ‘loss
model’.
There is another conception of the law of torts.
‘Tort’ comes indirectly from the Latin tortus which means crooked or twisted.
In modern French, ‘tu as tort’ means ‘you are wrong’. ‘Wrong’ has the same origin
as ‘wrung’ which is, again, twisted. We have a law of torts (plural) not a law of tort,
just as we have a law of wrongs not a law of wrong.
A tort is a species of wrong.¹³ A wrong is a breach of a duty owed to someone
else. A breach of a duty owed to someone else is an infringement of a right they have
against the tortfeasor. Before a defendant can be characterized as a tortfeasor the
anterior question of whether the claimant had a right against him must be
answered.¹⁴The law of torts is concerned with the secondary obligations generated
by the infringement of primary rights. The infringement of rights, not the inﬂic-
tion of loss, is the gist of the law of torts.¹⁵This conception of the law of torts I shall
call the ‘rights model’.
Introduction
2
⁸ Peabody Donation Fund v Sir Lindsay Parkinson & Co Ltd [1985] AC 210 (HL) 239–41 (Lord
Keith); Yuen Kun Yeu v Attorney General of Hong Kong [1988] AC 175 (PC (HK)) 190–94 (Lord
Keith); Rowling v Takaro Properties Ltd [1988] AC 473 (PC (NZ)) 501 (Lord Keith); Hill v Chief
Constable of West Yorkshire [1989] AC 53 (HL) 60 (Lord Keith); Caparo Industries plc v Dickman
[1990] 2 AC 605 (HL) 617–18 (Lord Bridge) 633 (Lord Oliver) 658 (Lord Jauncey).
⁹ Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 AC 32 at [9] (Lord
Bingham); J Steyn ‘Perspectives of Corrective Justice in Tort Law’ John Maurice Kelly Memorial Lecture
4; C Wright ‘Introduction to the Law of Torts’ (1942) 8 CLJ 238; P Devlin The Enforcement of Morals
(1965) 39–40; cf Broome v Cassell & Co Ltd [1972] AC 1027 (HL) 1114 (Lord Wilberforce).
¹⁰ Gregg v Scott [2005] UKHL 2, [2005] 2 AC 176 [99] (Baroness Hale).
¹¹ J Fleming ‘Remoteness and Duty: The Control Devices in Liability for Negligence’ (1953) 31
Can B Rev 471; Dorset Yacht Co Ltd v Home Ofﬁce [1969] 2 QB 412 (CA) 426 (Lord Denning MR);
D v East Berkshire Community NHS Trust [2005] 2 AC 373 [94] (HL) (Lord Nicholls).
¹² Smith v Littlewoods Organisation Ltd [1987] 1 AC 241 at 280 (HL) (Lord Goff).
¹³ P Birks ‘The Concept of a Civil Wrong’ in D Owen (ed) Philosophical Foundations of Tort Law
(1995) 29; cf OW Holmes The Common Law (1881) 144.
¹⁴ W Blackstone Commentaries on the Law of England (1765–1769) vol 3, 2; Allen v Flood [1898]
AC 1 (HL) 28 (Cave J); A Goodhart ‘The foundations of tortious liability’ (1938) 2 MLR 1.
¹⁵ Admiralty Commissioners v The Owners of the SS Amerika [1917] AC 38 (HL) 55 (Lord Sumner);
Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] AC 562 (HL) 619 (Lord Macmillan).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/11718/chapter/160690303 by Lancaster University user on 21 September 2023
For torts actionable per se, such as trespass, the rights model appears obviously
preferable. However, it is no less correct for torts, such as the general rule in rela-
tion to slander, which are only actionable upon proof of consequential loss.
This work will seek to show the importance and truth of conceiving of torts as
the infringement of primary rights.
Introduction
3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/11718/chapter/160690303 by Lancaster University user on 21 September 2023
15
Justice
A. Functions
Can the law of torts be explained as a free-standing subject, justiﬁed by the goals it
might be thought to pursue? It is in relation to liability for personal injuries caused
by accidents that the most consideration has been given to functionalist, or conse-
quentialist, accounts of the law of torts. However, there is no reason why the goals
radical reformers have identiﬁed could not be seen as of general application to the
entire law of torts. Indeed, it is only by keeping the focus upon one narrow set of
claims that sight can be lost of what the law of torts is about, and a functionalist
account be made to appear plausible.
1. Compensation
Compensation for loss is commonly seen as the most important goal of the law of
torts.¹ However, it is patently defective in ensuring compensation of either the
deserving or the needy.² First, the law of torts is extremely narrow in its coverage.
Only someone who suffers loss as a result of a tort, who can identify a tortfeasor
who is able to pay, will obtain compensation. If we broadened our focus to, say,
victims of accidents it becomes apparent that the law of torts offers little hope of
compensation to most of those within society who are deserving or in need. If X
has his leg broken by falling down the stairs through no one’s fault, whilst Y’s leg
is broken by the carelessness of Z, why is X more deserving of society’s largesse
than Y?³ That the ultimate source of compensation is a collective fund paid for by
a ﬂat rate insurance premium, adds to the perception of injustice. Why, it is argued,
should society favour the party in need who is lucky enough to fall within the
¹ eg G Williams and B Hepple,The Foundations of Tort Law (1976) 26.
² F James ‘Accident Liability Reconsidered: The Impact of Liability Insurance’ (1948) 57 Yale LJ
549 at 569–70; TG Ison The Forensic Lottery (1967) 1–30; R Abel ‘A Critique of Torts’ (1990) 37
UCLA 785 at 796–806; S Sugarman ‘Doing Away With Tort Law’ (1985) Cal L Rev 555 at 591–616;
J Fleming ‘Is There a Future for Tort?’ (1984) 44 La L Rev 1193 at 1203–1207; J O’Connell and
B Kelly The Blame Game (1987); P Bell and J O’Connell Accidental Justice (1997); H Luntz ‘A Personal
Journey Through the Law of Torts’ (2005) 27 Syd LR 383.
³ P Atiyah ‘Personal Injuries in the Twenty-First Century: Thinking the Unthinkable’ in P Birks
(ed) Wrongs and Remedies in the Twenty-First Century (1996) 1 at 22.
Torts and Rights. Robert Stevens.
© Oxford University Press 2007. Published 2007 by Oxford University Press.
purview of the ‘tort system’? This distributive inequity is increased by the very
generous full compensation for all loss suffered, regardless of need or desert, which
the law of torts affords to those lucky enough to fall within its scope, whilst those
outside are left to much less generous compensation systems, such as state invalid-
ity beneﬁt. Secondly, the law of torts is expensive to run when compared with other
compensation systems, such as the social security system.⁴ The fees of lawyers and
others, whether in relation to court actions or, more commonly, settlements, are
costly. Neither the issues of whether the defendant, or claimant, is at fault, nor the
appropriate level of compensation, tailored as it is to the claimant’s personal losses,
may be easy to determine or agree. Flat rate payment systems are much more cost
effective. Liability insurers also incur high costs in assessing and collecting pre-
miums. Paying such a high price to compensate so few, appears irrational. Thirdly,
the court’s remedial responses which do not seek to compensate, for example
punitive and restitutionary damages, make little sense if our goal is compensation
of loss. From this perspective, such awards lead to inexplicable windfalls being
conferred. Fourthly, why are damages awarded for ‘losses’ which are incapable of
being satisfactorily made good by compensation, such as the pain from the loss of
a foot, or the misery from the destruction of a family home? Only economic loss is
capable of eradication by compensatory awards of money and this is the focus of
other compensation schemes, such as social security.
2. Deterrence
The literature seeking to provide a theoretical explanation for the law of torts as a
mechanism for deterring injury-causing conduct is voluminous.⁵ It can be argued
that in the case of loss caused by accidents, a rational enterprise will expend money
on safety precautions up to the point where the marginal cost will exceed the mar-
ginal savings in liability for torts. The theory is that the presence of liability for
torts, whilst it will not, and cannot, prevent all accidents, will ensure the optimal
level of safety precautions.
In practice, the problems with justifying the law of torts as a system for the
deterrence of harm are well known.⁶ Although there is no doubt that the law of
torts has some impact on conduct, and it may be that the costs of the system can
be justiﬁed by their beneﬁcial effects, the true comparison is not between having
Functions
321
⁴ P Cane Atiyah’s Accidents Compensation and the Law (7th edn, 2006) 395–407.
⁵ eg W Landes and R Posner The Economic Structure of Tort Law (1987).
⁶ S Sugarman ‘Doing Away With Tort Law’ (1985) Cal L Rev 555 at 559–90; R Abel ‘A Critique
of Torts’ (1990) 37 UCLA 785 at 806–819; P Cane‘Tort Law as Regulation’ (2002) 31 Common
Law World Rev 305; M Franklin ‘Replacing the Negligence Lottery: Compensation and Selective
Reimbursement’ (1967) 53 Virginia L Rev 774 at 823–25; P Cane Atiyah’s Accidents Compensation
and the Law (7th edn, 2006) 424–58; B Hepple ‘Negligence: The Search for Coherence’ (1997) 50
CLP 69 at 84–6, 93; cf G Schwarz ‘Reality in the Economic Analysis of Tort Law? Does Tort Law
Really Deter?’ 42 (1994) UCLA Law Rev 377.
the current law and no regulatory structure, but between the current system and
other methods of regulating behaviour. The funds expended on the ‘tort system’
could be spent in more effective ways. In the language of the economist, we must
consider the opportunity costs foregone in considering whether the ‘tort system’
provides value for money as a method of regulating conduct. There are many rea-
sons for considering that the ‘tort system’ itself is not the (Pareto) optimal regime
which can be devised for regulating behaviour.
First, the vast majority of claims are paid out of liability insurance. As the defend-
ant does not personally pay, the deterrence impact is largely lost. The presence of
‘no claims’ bonuses, an excess, and the possibility of a defendant’s premiums being
subsequently increased after a claim, means that liability insurance does not com-
pletely negate the inﬂuence of the law of torts on conduct. However, it does signiﬁ-
cantly blunt it. In the long run, because of administrative costs, it makes better
economic sense for most insurers to charge a ﬂat premium determined by what the
market will bear, rather than incur the expense of attempting to tailor the premiums
charged to the degree of risks being run by each person insured. Consequently, the
careless and the careful will pay much the same.
Secondly, the quantum of liability imposed, and the consequential encourage-
ment to take care, bears no relationship to the defendant’s blameworthiness. A
momentary lapse of judgment by a driver of a car which results in a commercial
barrister being injured and unable to work will result in a vast award. The advertent
and reckless running of a risk may result in a much lower quantum of damages if
the tortfeasor is lucky enough to kill rather than maim his victim.
Thirdly, the law of torts probably has little, if any, effect in deterring an indi-
vidual’s brief moment of inattention or absent-mindedness. It is too much to
expect the law of torts to change human nature, and to have anything but negli-
gible impact upon behaviour which has not been reﬂected upon. Even in relation
to the behaviour of businesses or other enterprises over time, it is improbable
that in practice they possess the information required to calculate the potential
costs and beneﬁts of their activities in anything but the most rough and ready
manner.
Fourthly, the impact of the ‘tort system’ on conduct is insigniﬁcant when set
alongside the other factors which inﬂuence our behaviour. The vast majority of
drivers take care not to run over other people because they consider it morally
wrong carelessly to injure others. Within the law, the criminal law, whether in
relation to speed limits, anti-social behaviour orders, or life sentences for murder,
has much more impact upon behaviour than the law of torts. There are other
more effective and efﬁcient extra-legal ways of regulating conduct, from the self-
regulation of professional bodies through to advertising campaigns against drink
driving. If there were no other inﬂuences on our behaviour, the ‘tort system’ might
have signiﬁcant impact; as it is it has very little.
In order to assess the claims sometimes made that the law of torts plays a signiﬁ-
cant role in regulating conduct empirical evidence is necessary. The evidence
Justice
322
available for the deterrent impact of the law of torts is thin, and the results are, at
best, equivocal.⁷
3. Other Goals?
Once deterrence and compensation have been put to one side, the other possible
functions of the law of torts can be dealt with relatively brieﬂy. It is sometimes said
that torts serve a loss distribution function.⁸ If a manufacturer of a defective gin-
ger beer bottle is held liable for the injuries someone suffers as a result, its liability
will be passed on either to its customers through raising the price of its products or
through liability insurance to the pool of those who pay premiums. Instead of the
loss falling as a crippling blow upon one person, many persons bear a much
smaller loss.
Much the same sort of objections to this argument can be raised as are raised to
seeing the law of torts as a compensation system. Its coverage is extremely narrow.
Why should it be this particular manufacturer who acts as a conduit for the spread-
ing of loss; why not another manufacturer or the state itself which can pass on the
loss fairly and widely through taxation?
If we try to explain the law of torts, as we could the criminal law, as concerned
with punishing those who fail in the duties expected of them by society, why is the
law of torts’ response generally not quantiﬁed by reference to the defendant’s
blameworthiness? Why should this particular claimant receive the ‘windfall’ of
damages rather than someone else? Why not a professional group of claim
bringers, perhaps employed by the state?
The problems with the various functions suggested do not disappear if we try to
combine them together. Indeed, as these goals frequently point in diametrically
different directions, it is difﬁcult to imagine how a rational system could be con-
structed around any combination of them. The failure of any satisfactory func-
tionalist account of the law has caused some commentators to conclude that the
law of torts is merely symbolic.⁹ If so, it is an expensive symbol.
B. Reform?
The inevitable failure in practice of attempts to justify the law of torts as a free-
standing ‘system’ serving external functions, if taken seriously to their logical con-
clusion, would lead us to accept that the law of torts makes no sense and should
Reform?
323
⁷ eg D Dewes, D Duff, and M Trebilcock Exploring the Domain of Accident Law (1996) 414;
D Harris et al, Compensation and Support for Illness and Injury (1984); Lord Pearson ‘Report of the Royal
Commission on Civil Liability and Compensation for Personal Injury’ 3 vols (Cmnd 7054) (1978).
⁸ eg A Grubb (ed) The Law of Tort (2002) 26–27.
⁹ J Stapleton ‘Duty of Care: Peripheral Parties and Alternative Opportunities for Deterrence’
(1995) 111 LQR 301 at 302–303. Symbolic of what?
simply be abolished. In England, Professor Patrick Atiyah is most closely associated
with this view. His original position was that the law of torts, in relation to personal
injuries caused by accidents, should be abolished, to be replaced by a no-fault com-
pensation scheme administered by the state for the purpose of compensating all
accident victims.¹⁰ Such an approach, which has been adopted in New Zealand,
has obvious attractions. The person in need because of injuries from an accident
is not treated differently according to the fortuity of being able to pinpoint a solv-
ent tortfeasor. Society’s resources are used more effectively to compensate more
people.
Despite these gains, such a system cannot be justiﬁed. Why should accident
victims be accorded such favourable treatment? Why should victims of disease be
excluded from coverage?¹¹ Disease victims are a far larger group, but this is not a
principled basis for different treatment. The New Zealand scheme is disﬁgured by
boundary disputes as to whether the claimant is the victim of an accident or some
other sort of misfortune.¹² Unless the compensation scheme is artiﬁcially limited
to one class of person, such as accident victims, it loses what attractions it had
because of the cost implications. Even if victims of disease were brought within
any scheme, why should the boundary be drawn there? Why not all victims of the
vicissitudes of life? Why exclude the elderly, the unemployed, or the educationally
disadvantaged? The different treatment of one class of the needy is particularly
stark if, as in New Zealand,¹³ compensation is limited to economic need rather
than pain and suffering. Why should one class of the poor be singled out for
favourable treatment?
They should not. Most developed states have a system of social security funded
from general taxation to meet the basic needs of the poor. Special provision for
those with needs arising from disability, however caused, is also in place. What the
appropriate levels of compensation should be is an important matter for political
debate. The law of torts is not a proxy for the achievement of the same sort of
goals. The no-fault compensation schemes which are put in place of the areas of
the law of torts which are cut back lack the moral underpinnings necessary to be
secure against a change in political climate. Indeed, no-fault schemes take the jus-
tiﬁcation for their scope from the ‘tort system’ which they replace.
Professor Atiyah ﬁnally adopted the position that the original diagnosis of what
was wrong with the ‘tort system’ was correct but that the appropriate cure was that
it should largely be abolished without anything being put in its place. Individuals
would then be free to take out ﬁrst party insurance to protect themselves against
harm as they saw ﬁt.¹⁴ Such a reform avoids the problems of arbitrary line-drawing
Justice
324
¹⁰ P Atiyah Accidents, Compensation and the Law (3rd edn, 1980) 627.
¹¹ See generally J Stapleton Disease and the Compensation Debate (1982).
¹² K Oliphant ‘Deﬁning “Medical Misadventure” Lessons from New Zealand’ (1996) 4 Med LR 1.
¹³ Accident Compensation Act 1972.
¹⁴ P Atiyah ‘Personal Injuries in the Twenty-First Century: Thinking the Unthinkable’ in P Birks (ed)
Wrongs and Remedies in the Twenty-First Century (1996) 1.
associated with his earlier view. It is the logical end position of those who think
that the law of torts needs to be justiﬁed by its consequences.
Although the criticisms aimed at the law of torts generally focus upon the law
of personal injuries, there is no reason to suppose that the goals identiﬁed are
any better served in any other context. Once we contemplate abolishing the law of
torts altogether, which would mean the abolition of most of our legal rights, the
error becomes plain. The law of torts is not a free-standing subject which exists to
fulﬁl any of the goals identiﬁed. If it is responded that the criticisms are only
aimed at our right not to be injured or killed, it is legitimate to ask why this particu-
lar right is deserving of abolition. Why should our right not to be injured or killed
by others be treated less seriously than our rights not to be defamed or have our
land trespassed upon?
Once it is realized that the law of torts is concerned with the vindication of our
rights, it becomes clear that attempts to shape its rules as if it was a free-standing
subject concerned with fulﬁlling one of the goals set out above is to make precisely
the same mistake as the abolitionist. For a court, or a reformer, to try and bend rules
concerned with the vindication of rights to fulﬁl any of the goals set out above will
lead to incoherence.
In The Idea of Private Law, Professor Weinrib makes the startling claim that
private law is like love.¹⁵ By this he means that private law is only capable of being
understood in terms of itself. We should not, and could not, seek to justify private
law in terms of its extrinsic ends, regardless of whether these extrinsic ends come
from social practice, morality, economic efﬁciency, or anything else. The main
focus of his work which seeks to make good this (and other) propositions is the
law of torts.
One response would be that if private law really does serve no function at all,
why not just abolish it? A legal system is very expensive to run. Another response is
that once we shift our focus from the law of torts to other areas of private law the
claim that they are not to be justiﬁed in terms of extrinsic ends seems implausible.
Is company law, for example, only capable of being understood from an internal
legal perspective? Is its existence inevitable and unconnected with its usefulness? If
the common law has not always had a law of companies, why not simply abolish
it? The answer is that companies, which are an entirely legal construct and do not
physically exist in the real world, are a useful way for human beings to organize
themselves in the world in which we live. Some sort of functional explanation for
this area of law is required.
However, although Professor Weinrib’s claim about private law in general is not
only counter-intuitive but implausible, it is true about the law of torts. If we see
the law of torts as concerned with the secondary obligations generated by the
infringement of primary rights, it is an essentially legal subject. The giveaway sign
Reform?
325
¹⁵ E Weinrib The Idea of Private Law (1995) 6. See also WH Auden ‘Law Like Love’ in WH Auden
Collected Poems (1991).
of this is its name. Lay people do not talk about ‘torts’. They do talk about the
things they own, their lives, their bodies, their families, their reputations, their
voting, and so on.
C. Corrective, Distributive, and Commutative
If the account given in this book is correct, attempts to construct unitary theories
to explain the law of torts are wrong-headed. The primary rights which, if vio-
lated, give rise to secondary obligations are diverse and arise for different reasons.
Similarly, although the protection of these rights may have a number of incidental
beneﬁts, these should not be confused with what the law of torts is ‘about’.
Criticizing the law of torts for being a poor compensation system, or for its failure
adequately to regulate conduct, is like criticizing the Apollo space programme for
being an expensive way of developing non-stick pans.
There is nothing objectionable to assessing the law of torts according to external
criteria¹⁶ (eg Is it efﬁcient? Is it big? Is it beautiful? Is it fun? Does it lead to a fair
distribution of resources?). However, the failure of the law of torts to match up to
such criteria should not lead us to conclude that it makes no sense. The law of torts
cannot be understood by reference to such criteria. The fact that the law of torts has
coincidental effects should not lead us to conclude that these are its functions or
goals. It is meaningless to talk of the law of torts having a function or goal at all.
The idea that a legal institution can be justiﬁed without appeals to essentially utili-
tarian or consequentialist goals, appears bewildering to a layman, a politician, or
an economist.
Attempts to understand the law of torts in terms of functions or goals fails, as
Professor Weinrib shows in The Idea of Private Law,¹⁷ to explain key features of
the law as we ﬁnd it. For example, if we seek to argue that the law of torts is con-
cerned with deterring reprehensible behaviour, why is it that it is this particular
claimant who has been caused loss who can claim? Why not hold all persons guilty
of such conduct liable to pay a ﬁne to the state, graded according to the degree of
fault? If the law of torts is concerned with compensating those who have suffered
injuries, why is such compensation only given to those who suffer injuries as a
result of the wrong of another? What is it that ties the claimant and defendant
together?
For those reluctant to accept that the law of torts is a several-millennia-old
mistake, made independently by disparate legal systems and foolishly persisted
in by all, the idea that the law of torts is concerned with ‘corrective justice’ is
attractive.
Justice
326
¹⁶ G Calabresi ‘Some Thoughts on Risk Distribution and the Law of Torts’ (1961) 70 Yale LJ 499;
cf W Landes and R Posner The Economic Structure of Tort Law (1987) 1.
¹⁷ E Weinrib The Idea of Private Law (1995) 5–6.
Aristotle sought to divide issues of justice into two classes. The ﬁrst class concerns
issues of distributive justice. If a human good, for example wealth, is divisible
amongst the members of a community, distributive justice is concerned with its
overall distribution. The criteria by which the justice of any distribution can be
assessed are diverse (eg need, merit, equality etc). The second class, corrective justice,
concerns the justice that rectiﬁes or remedies the inequalities which arise in dealings
between individuals. ‘As its name indicates, corrective justice has a rectiﬁcatory func-
tion. By correcting the injustice that the defendant has inﬂicted on the plaintiff, cor-
rective justice asserts a connection between the remedy and the wrong.’¹⁸ A simple
example is a man who defrauds another of his property. This is a central case because
the fraudster’s (factual) gain correlates with his victim’s (factual) loss. However, in
most cases there will be no such correlation, as in the typical case of someone who
injures someone else who is then obliged to pay compensation.
Corrective justice seems to explain some of the key features of the law of torts. In
particular it explains the central characteristic, so obvious as to be commonly over-
looked, that the liability of the defendant correlates with a power of the claimant to
claim. This is reﬂected in the requirement of causation, and the fact that recoveries
go to the claimant rather than to the state. By contrast, according to some econo-
mists, the fact that the damages payable by the defendant are awarded to the party
wronged is ‘a detail’.¹⁹
Whilst less bad than an attempt to explain the law of torts through its functions
or goals, a corrective justice account in this form is inevitably incomplete. It is com-
patible both with the loss-based and rights-based models of the law. For example,
French law, which on its face is not a rights-based system is no less a system of cor-
rective justice than the common law. Corrective justice in this form tells us noth-
ing about the primary rights we do and do not have.²⁰ In this weak form, it solely
explains the secondary obligations created by the infringement of primary rights.²¹
It would not offend this eviscerated form of corrective justice to abolish all of our
primary rights. Given rights, their infringement will require correction. Further,
the fact that the secondary obligations generated by the infringement of primary
rights are corrective in pattern does not necessarily tell us anything about the justi-
ﬁcation for the underlying primary right. The difﬁculty with an attempt to
explain the law of torts by relying upon this version of corrective justice is not that it
is wrong, but that it is trite. Indeed, some corrective justice theorists suggest that it
may be better to abolish our right not to be injured, and replace it with a no-fault
compensation scheme administered by the state.²² In this weak form, corrective
justice is compatible with any set of primary rights or none at all.
Corrective, Distributive, and Commutative
327
¹⁸ E Weinrib ‘Corrective Justice in a Nutshell’ (2002) 52 Uni Toronto LJ 349 at 350.
¹⁹ R Posner Economic Analysis of Law (2nd edn, 1977) 143; See also S Shavell Economic Analysis of
Accident Law (1987) 29–30, 105–110.
²⁰ P Cane ‘Distributive Justice and Tort Law’ (2001) NZLR 401; Harriton v Stephens [2006]
HCA 15 at [273] (Crennan J).
²¹ J Coleman The Practice of Principle (2001) 34–35.
²² Cf R Wright ‘Substantive Corrective Justice’ (1992) 77 Iowa L Rev 625 at 628.
Some commentators, such as Professor Weinrib, whilst mainly discussing the
secondary obligations generated by a wrong, can be read as intending to use ‘cor-
rective justice’ to explain our primary rights as well. On the wider approach, the
term ‘corrective justice’ is not trite but misleading. In English, the language of
‘correction’ presupposes the wrongfulness of the conduct, and consequently, the
primary right the violation of which needs correction. I have a right that you do
not punch me on the nose; prior to your doing so, there is nothing to ‘correct’.
Where a primary right is speciﬁcally enforced, for example through an injunction
or speciﬁc performance, it is inapt to describe this as justiﬁed in terms of corrective
justice. There is no imbalance which is being remedied: the court is simply enfor-
cing the status quo.
On the wider approach the label ‘corrective justice’ is intended to cover all justi-
ﬁcations for rights which follow from what is just or fair as between any two mem-
bers of society. This notion of justice can be invoked to explain both primary
rights and the secondary rights of correction. This broader notion of justice is
sometimes called ‘commutative justice’²³ in order to encompass such cases, a label
which is much less prone to mislead. It is unknowable whether Aristotle would
have endorsed the wider or narrower account of ‘corrective justice’ as he never dis-
cussed the distinction between primary and secondary rights, nor did he attempt
to articulate an account of the primary rights we have. The concept of rights lay in
the distant future.
However, as an explanation for the existence and scope of all primary rights
commutative justice is implausible. The legislature can, and does, create rights for
a wide range of reasons not conﬁned to the question of fairness as between any
two members of society. The claim that private law is about commutative justice
is only attractive in relation to judge-made law, where what is fair is, inevitably,
determined through the resolution of the dispute between the two persons before
the judge. However, even in relation to judge-made law, it is unpersuasive. As seen,
in deﬁning the scope of our primary rights the courts do take into account the
general social beneﬁt to everyone of an activity and the risks to everyone not just the
claimant, which it poses. Ambulances are allowed to drive faster than delivery
vans, although the risk they pose to a bystander is precisely the same. One person
may have a (qualiﬁed) privilege to make a defamatory statement about another
because of the legal or moral right of the recipient to be told. A defendant may be
justiﬁed in inducing a breach of contact where not to do so would be the violation
of a right of a third party.²⁴ The scope of our rights is not solely determined by
considerations of what is fair as between claimant and defendant, ignoring all
others.
Justice
328
²³ J Finnis Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) 178–179.
²⁴ eg Said v Butt [1920] KB 597.
D. Why Do We Have the Rights We Do?²⁵
Possibly the most important objection to the rights-based conception of the law of
torts is that it is essentially empty. However descriptively accurate the account of
the law so far given may be, the sceptic will still need to know why we have the pri-
mary rights we do (and do not) have. A comprehensive account which explained
the existence (and non-existence) of all of our actual (and possible) primary rights,
would require a book several times the size of this one. However, a basic account
can be given, although it may strike those familiar with the voluminous rights
literature as naïve. Indeed, a parent will recognize his own attempts to inculcate
respect for himself (‘How would you like it if he did that to you?’ ‘Your sister had
that ﬁrst’, ‘You promised to tidy your room’ etc). Fortunately, there is no necessity
for an extensive discussion of the works of Kant and Hegel in order to understand
and justify the rights recognized by the common law. Indeed, it would be sur-
prising, and almost certainly misleading, to engage in this endeavour, as it is very
doubtful whether those responsible for the common law, judges, either could have
been or were familiar with the work of such philosophers. In order to understand
and justify the law of torts it is unnecessary to be a profound thinker.
Two months after McLoughlin v O’Brian,²⁶ in which Lord Scarman had
renounced the use of policy arguments, Lord Roskill in Junior Books Ltd v Veitchi
Co Ltd stated:
Although it cannot be denied that policy considerations have from time to time been allowed
to play their part in the last century and the present either in limiting or extending the
scope of the tort of negligence since it ﬁrst developed as it were in its own right in the
course of the last century, yet today I think its scope is best determined by considerations of
principle rather than policy.²⁷
The common law, which includes our most important primary rights against one
another, is judge-made. Lord Roskill’s view is that whilst our law was at some point
in the past determined by policy choices made by judges, the time for such legisla-
tive action has gone.
If the law can be, and has been, shaped by the legislative acts of individual
judges acting according to their own assessment of the weight to be given to a bas-
ket of frequently unarticulated policy concerns, all of our law which has not been
set down by the legislature is up for grabs. A judge at a point in the hierarchy
below the House of Lords will always be bound by previous decisions, just as he is
by legislation. The House of Lords by contrast has the power to overturn any pre-
vious decision. There is no reason to suppose that the determination by an earlier
Why Do We Have the Rights We Do?
329
²⁵ As throughout, ‘rights’ is used in the sense of speciﬁc claim rights, or the claim rights which arise
together for a common reason and which are speciﬁc to a larger bundle of different species of rights.
²⁶ [1983] 1 AC 410 (HL).
²⁷ [1983] 1 AC 520 (HL) 539.
court of the policy balance was superior to that which would be reached by the
current court. Indeed, as the current court will presumably have a ﬁrmer grasp of
modern social issues, it may be supposed that the policy choices of judges of today
will be superior for modern conditions than those made by the long-dead. If
members of the current court, acting as conscientious legislators, believe that the
earlier policy choice was incorrect they would be free to substitute their own. All
of our judge-made law would therefore be contingent upon the personal assess-
ment of the correct policy balance by the current membership of the House of
Lords. Why are rules based upon the choices of long-dead judges with no democ-
ratic mandate deserving, at least presumptively, of respect?
How can, and did, the judges of the common law, largely unfettered by legisla-
tion, determine what our rights are without resorting to policy choices? How, start-
ing with a blank piece of paper, does, and did, a judge determine what the rights of
the two parties in front of him are? An account of judicial decision making cannot
be wholly interpretive because at some point in the past there was no text from
which any interpretation could be derived. In the common law the judges did not
start with an authoritative text, such as the United States Constitution, from which
a complex set of rights could be extrapolated. Of course, in the modern common
law, the problem is not that we lack authoritative text from which to derive the
answers to difﬁcult legal questions, but rather that we have too much. However, the
foundational question of how the common law has legitimacy without an original
text still needs to be addressed.
One answer could be that the common law judge was, and is, able to appeal to a
still older set of rights determined by Roman law. However, this does not resolve
the difﬁculty. Why should our rights be determined by the policy choices of Gaius
or Tribonian, who are even longer dead than Lord Mansﬁeld? Why should a court,
in particular a supreme court, afford presumptive respect to such choices made by
men (always men) from long ago? In common law systems other than England,
the problem is even starker. Not only are the initial decisions ancient, they were
made by foreigners.
The answer is twofold. The ﬁrst stage is that the moral rights we have, and those
which ought to be given the force of law, are capable of being deduced from the
nature and experience of ourselves, and the world and society in which we live.
Rational people can recognize such rights independently of their being given force
of law. The recognition of such rights is not dependent upon the making of policy
choices, nor is the decision to give them the force of law.
It follows that the rights which are solely sourced in judicial decisions are those
sometimes labelled natural, human, or moral rights. ‘It would not be too much of an
exaggeration to say that the classical Common Law of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries was really a product of the eighteenth-century Natural Law tradition.’²⁸
Justice
330
²⁸ D Ibbetson ‘Natural Law and Common Law’ 5 (2001) Edin LR 4.
Indeed, the provisional account of rights good against the rest of the world set out at
the start of this book would have been recognizable to Grotius in the 17th century.²⁹
The label ‘moral rights’ may be preferred as these rights are derived from human
reﬂection, unlike a natural law, such as the law of gravity, which would continue
to exist even if there was no one to observe it. Moral rights must be deduced by
reason, they do not just exist like stones to be picked up or observed. The fashion-
able idiom is the label ‘human rights’ but as virtually all rights, whether moral or
legal, are capable of being held by humans, this is less accurate. Further, in some
context ‘human rights’ has also come to mean rights individuals have against the
state to certain human goods.³⁰ Moral rights are not limited to rights against the
state.
Moral rights are not the only sort of rights there can be. The legislature can cre-
ate any legal rights it chooses, for any purpose. The right I have against the high-
way authority that the roads are in reasonable repair is not a moral right which
exists independently of its legal recognition. Society could be organized around
private roads with our ability to pass down them regulated by contracts, with their
repairs met out of tolls. At one time this was commonplace, and it may be that in
England a gradual return to such a regime will occur. It would not, however, be
possible for the courts to create a public body with the responsibility of maintain-
ing the roads funded out of general taxation, with a duty to repair imposed upon
it, with corresponding rights conferred upon members of the public. Only a legis-
lature can create such a right for the purposes of meeting one or more policy goals.
Once a right has been given force and content by law, this provides an additional
moral justiﬁcation for respecting it, but there are many legal rights which have no
existence independent of their legal recognition.
Rights which are recognized and created judicially not only have a different
source, they are of a different sort. It is for this reason that judge-made law is pecu-
liarly interesting and important, and why we must be wary of such judicially rec-
ognized rights being cut back by legislation. However, it does not, of course, follow
from the proposition that the only legal rights that can be judge-made are those
derived from moral rights, that it is only the courts which can give the force of law
to our moral rights. The legislature can, and has, legislated to expand and restrict
the legal force given to our moral rights.
Similarly, just as not all legal rights are moral rights, not all moral rights either
are, or should be, given legal enforcement. I may have a moral right that you do not
tell me lies; it does not necessarily follow that a legal system which did not always
give recognition to such a right in all circumstances is necessarily defective. How-
ever, any legal system which gave no recognition to the minimum content of our
moral rights would not be worthy of being described as a system of law at all. Moral
rights come ﬁrst. Judge-created legal rights are inevitably derived from moral rights.
Why Do We Have the Rights We Do?
331
²⁹ RW Lee The Jurisprudence of Holland by Hugo Grotius vol 1 (1926) 47(1).
³⁰ See, for example, the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
Unlike most of our legal rights, there is no institutional set of rules from which
we can mechanically identify moral rights. To determine them we each require
experience, reﬂection, and discourse with others. Ultimately, however, we are each
of us on our own.
In determining the minimum content of our moral rights, the starting point is
the negative formulation of the golden rule. We should not do unto others what
we would not want done unto ourselves. This must be accepted before any further
progress can be made. The golden rule requires us to respect the choices and pref-
erences of others. It requires that we treat others as if we were them, not as if they
were us. If I am a masochist, who enjoys being tortured, it would not be acceptable
for me to torture others simply because this would be what I would want in their
place. One further aspect of the golden rule is that we are each deserving, prima
facie, of equal concern and respect.
From the golden rule may be deduced our right to bodily safety.³¹ Human beings
do not live forever. They are not covered in titanium so as to be invulnerable to
physical harm. If we were incapable of being killed or injured, or conversely of
killing or injuring, there would be no need for a right good against all others
protecting our lives and bodily safety. This is not the world in which we ﬁnd
ourselves. Our right to freedom of movement may be similarly deduced. Human
beings are not trees or limpets.
Moral rights not only do not require recognition by a legal system in order for
us to discern their existence, they are also independent of the conventional moral-
ity of any particular society, although they commonly form part of such conven-
tions. I have a moral right not to be killed or injured which is good against you,
and everyone else, and there is nothing more which needs to be said. This is so
even if the society in which I live has a convention favouring the ritual slaughter of
lawyers (or anyone else). Similarly, we also all have a moral right to freedom of
movement, regardless of whether slavery is lawful or generally considered accept-
able within the society in which we ﬁnd ourselves. Rules which are contrary to our
moral rights are not necessarily not ‘law’ for that reason alone, but neither law nor
convention can abrogate our moral rights.
Moral rights do not change over time, although their application may. If it is a
wrong arbitrarily to discriminate against someone in the allocation of some public
good, such as a university education, on the basis of his race or gender, and it is, it
was always a moral wrong. Further, the correct answer to moral questions, such as
whether an institution of slavery is morally wrong, cannot be authoritatively deter-
mined by democratic vote. The primary reason why we entrust judges to decide
moral questions is because of their professional skills acquired from experience
and a reﬂection upon justice, not because they have a hotline to popular opinion.
It is tempting to try to bolster the arguments for a moral right, or for its recog-
nition and enforcement in law, by reference to the beneﬁcial consequences of such
Justice
332
³¹ Cf HLA Hart The Concept of Law (2nd edn, 1994) 194–95.
a right. A right not to be killed may, and probably does, result in some fewer
deaths. Such consequentialist reasoning is, however, both unnecessary and poten-
tially misleading. Moral rights are capable of justiﬁcation independently of their
utility or consequences. Moral rights do not have functions or goals. Utilitarian or
consequentialist arguments for their recognition can be adduced, but such argu-
ments are otiose and apt to mislead us into thinking that without such arguments
moral rights are unjustiﬁable. If we thought rights were justiﬁed by their beneﬁcial
consequences, they could be ignored where this would lead to a better overall
result. If, for example, we thought a right to life was justiﬁable because it leads to
fewer deaths, it would be acceptable to kill you for your organs if this could save
the life of more than one other person. It might be argued by a utilitarian rule that
a bright line exclusionary rule against killing was justiﬁable because of its prophy-
lactic effect. If ‘good’ murders were acceptable, this would lead to more ‘bad’ mur-
ders. This seems to provide an explanation for the stability of rights and why they
are usually of peremptory force. However, on this approach, it would be accept-
able to kill you for your valuable organs to further the greater good if it could be
demonstrated that this did not undermine the impact of the general prohibition
on murder, perhaps if it could be done in secret. Our moral rights, and their legal
recognition and enforcement, are not contingent in this way.
If it could be shown that the existence and enforcement by law of a right not to
be killed, with correlative duties not to do so, led to no fewer deaths and no change
for the better in human behaviour, would this be a good argument in favour of its
abolition? It would not. It is simply wrong to kill other people; it is not a wrong
because this leads to fewer deaths.
This does not mean that we should pay any price for a legal system which rec-
ognized and enforced such a right. If the legal system ate up 90 per cent of gross
domestic product we might conclude that the enforcement of such moral rights
by law was not worth the candle. However, the reason for the enforcement of
rights is not that this will make the world a better place in the future, although it
may do. It is consequently a mistake to attempt to shape our law of torts as if this
was its purpose. We value moral rights for themselves and it is for this reason that
we give them legal recognition and enforcement, not for any beneﬁcial conse-
quences which may ﬂow from them.
The existence of our rights not to be killed, injured, or detained against our will
are capable of being deduced from what is fair as between any two persons within
society. It is fair, as between you and me, that you do not kill or torture me. This rule
can then be universalized as between all individuals. However, the golden rule is not
simply bilateral. It is sometimes argued that the golden rule is defective as it would
lead to the absurd result that a judge could not sentence a criminal, as the judge
himself may not be willing to have such punishment himself if he was in his place.
However, a judge has undertaken an oath of ofﬁce. This oath is given to the state for
the beneﬁt of all. A judge who refuses to sentence a criminal is in breach of this oath,
and acts wrongfully as he is not behaving in relation to all others as he should.
Why Do We Have the Rights We Do?
333
More pertinently for the law of torts, as we have seen, the scope of our rights is
not solely determined by what is fair as between claimant and defendant. In draw-
ing the line between everyone’s interest in security from physical harm and every-
one’s interest in liberty of action, the law takes into account the potential risks and
beneﬁts to everyone that an activity poses. Again, however, it is the golden rule
which gives content to our rights, not the furtherance of a goal such as wealth
maximization.
The temptation to try and explain by reference to their beneﬁcial consequences
other moral rights which are given the force of law is even stronger. Our right not to
be lied to or our right that promises be kept are extremely important in facilitating
co-operation and group living. They are, no doubt, extremely useful rights. Again,
however, these beneﬁcial consequences are unnecessary for their justiﬁcation.
Again, if they were necessary, the ‘right’ could be ignored where the beneﬁcial con-
sequences of respecting it were outweighed by the beneﬁcial consequences of not
doing so. As moral rights recognized by the law are justiﬁable independently of the
beneﬁts resulting from their recognition, they cannot be ignored where the beneﬁts
of respecting them are outweighed by the adverse consequences.
We all of us have an interest in knowing the truth. Without such knowledge
we cannot make informed choices as to how to live our lives. Knowledge is as
fundamental a human good as our physical well-being. A lie, which is believed
and upon which the claimant acts, is a wrong to that person because of the viola-
tion of this human good. This is so regardless of whether there are, or are not,
adverse consequences.³²
Similarly, our good relations with other people are valuable for themselves. In
particular, the trust we have in one another is an interest all rational people value.
A promise is a conventional way in which this bond of trust between persons can
be invoked. Whilst it would be possible to imagine a society where promises did
not exist, promises are not binding merely because of the social convention, but
because of the interest in good relations between persons which the convention
relies upon. Consequently, promises are intrinsically valuable.³³ By making a promise
we invoke trust, and by breaking a promise we wrong those who have been led to
trust us. Indeed, awareness of the promise at the time at which it is made is not
necessary for the breaking of the promise to be wrongful. A promisee who subse-
quently discovers that a promise to him, of which he was unaware, has been broken
is also wronged. Trust has been subsequently undermined although no expect-
ations were generated at the time of promising. Similarly, the accessory right good
against everyone else, that they do not induce the breach of a contract, protects
this bond of trust between persons. ‘The serpent was worse than Eve.’³⁴
Justice
334
³² Cf C Fried Right and Wrong (1978) ch 3.
³³ Cf J Raz ‘Promises in Morality and Law’ (1982) 95 Harv LR 916; D Kimel From Promise to
Contract (2003) 27–29.
³⁴ T Weir Economic Torts (1997) 35.
There would be no necessity for property rights if human beings had no need of
food, clothing, or shelter, or if we lived in a world of limitless abundance.³⁵ Again,
this is not the world we ﬁnd ourselves in.³⁶ The physical things which we both
need and want are not in limitless supply. Some sort of property law is necessary.
Regardless of whether we have a moral right to private property,³⁷ we have a moral
right against the state to some system of property holding.
It would be possible for a society to have a communal property law completely
different from the system of personal property rights found in the common law.
Whatever the merits of communal property rights, it is not the sort of system of
rights which is capable of being recognized by judicial act as it is beyond judicial
competence to construct such a scheme of holdings through a sequence of bilat-
eral disputes.
Private property rights may, in the long run, be useful to facilitate competition
and an economically vibrant capitalist society. However, it is unnecessary to appeal
to such beneﬁcial consequences in order to justify the respect accorded to private
property rights. Private property rights are morally justiﬁable in any event. We
each of us desire for ourselves that we be secure in the things we possess. Each of us
wants to be secure that others do not take our clothes from our backs, or that they
do not destroy the crop we have grown, or the picture we have painted, or that we
can sleep peacefully in our beds. In order for each of us to be able to choose to live
our lives as we please, some level of security in relation to the personal possession
of physical things is essential. Similarly, we also need security in our ability to
choose how to dispose of these things to others, either during our lifetime or upon
death. Just as we want these rights for ourselves, we cannot deny them to others.
In a pre-legal world, how can a judge resolve the competing claims of two indi-
viduals to a single item of property? Without any method for determining an
overall fair distribution of assets, a judge is forced to adopt a system of rules based
upon ﬁrst occupation, taking or creation. The common law has adopted the rule
of the playground. If I ﬁnd a swarm of bees, my right to possess them is good
against you because I possessed them ﬁrst. What is fair as between you and me, is
also fair as between me and everyone else. A judge lacks the competence to seek to
determine title to property by other criteria, such as relative need. A plausible
alternative rule would be to give priority to the party whose labour has gone into
the property, by tilling the soil or repairing the car. However, this is of little assist-
ance where no party has as yet worked upon the asset and the common law has
adopted the straightforward rule of ﬁrst possession. Other approaches, such as the
tossing of a coin, cannot achieve the necessary stability. Various other methods of
acquisition, such as prescription, accession, or speciﬁcation are merely auxiliary,
dependent upon the right arising from ﬁrst possession. Within the common law,
Why Do We Have the Rights We Do?
335
³⁵ Cf HLA Hart The Concept of Law (2nd edn, 1994) 196.
³⁶ It is the world in William Morris’s News From Nowhere and Gene Roddenberry’s Star Trek where
property rights are unnecessary.
³⁷ J Waldron The Right to Private Property (1988).
the priority afforded to possession is frequently decisive, although there can be few
assets which have never at any time been possessed by anyone. A thief, or a squat-
ter, acquires a possessory title which is prior in time, and therefore superior, to the
title of anyone who did not already have a right to possess.³⁸ Property holdings
determined by a rule of ﬁrst possession will almost certainly not be the most pro-
ductive or efﬁcient distribution, but such goals are not the reasons behind the
recognition of private property rights at common law.
Any system of property rights which is judicially created will, almost inevitably,
not be distributively just. Any judge-made system of property rights needs to be
supplemented. In order to facilitate the most basic level of human ﬂourishing we
all need food to eat, water to drink, clothes for our backs, and somewhere to sleep.
Although it may be fair, overall, that I am taxed on the proceeds of this book and
the money given to the poor, whether to tax and how to determine the appropriate
level are not questions which can be determined by a judge-made rule.
Again, human infants are not born into the world able to look after themselves.
Children remain for a long time dependent upon the care of others. It would be
possible to live in a society where children were taken away by the state from birth
and cared for communally. That is not the society in which we live, where it is
accepted that individual parents, generally the child’s natural parents, will have
the bonds of love with their child that will lead to the best nurturing. From this,
we can deduce a right a child has against its parents that they take positive steps to
care for them. Similarly, parents have a moral right that others do not take their
children away.
Finally, if our moral rights are violated or infringed we have a moral right
against the wrongdoer that he will correct the wrong he has done. This obligation
to correct, both in morality and law, takes the form of achieving the next best to
the wrong not having been committed. For some wrongs, such as insults, the next
best may take the form of an obligation to apologize. An apology may take the
form of reparative action, for example personally caring for the person negligently
injured may be considered to be to achieve a result closer to the wrong not having
been committed than the mere payment of money for costs of care. Why not give
legal force to such a right to an apology? One answer is that some moral obliga-
tions cannot be enforced by compulsion at all. We cannot be compelled by law to
apologize for the wrongs we have done. An apology we are compelled to give is not
an apology at all. The whole point of an apology is that it is a voluntary acknow-
ledgment of the wrong by the wrongdoer. Compelled care is unlikely to be satis-
factory. Courts make money awards not because this is the next best which the
wrongdoer can do, but because this is the next best that courts can compel to
be done.
However, it is a mistake to think that because moral rights do not depend for
their justiﬁcation upon the beneﬁcial consequences of their recognition, they are
Justice
336
³⁸ Costello v Chief Constable of Derbyshire Constabulary [2001] EWCA Civ 381, [2001] 1 WLR 1437.
absolute and unqualiﬁed. If they can be justiﬁed regardless of any beneﬁcial conse-
quences, it might be thought that they must be respected whatever the conse-
quences. If there is a murderer at your door wondering if his intended victim is
inside your house, would it be a wrong to lie? In order to reject the position that
lying is always wrongful it is unnecessary to resort to appeals to the adverse conse-
quences which would follow. An absolute prohibition on lying ignores the possi-
bility that rights can conﬂict, a possibility familiar to a lawyer.³⁹ One person’s
right may override that of another, conferring a privilege which would not other-
wise exist.⁴⁰ If I am attacked I have both a moral and legal privilege as against my
attacker to use reasonable force to protect myself. Similarly, I can tell lies to save
my own life. Where the intended victim is someone else, his right not to be killed
may confer a privilege upon me to tell a lie. Indeed, it would be both a moral and
legal wrong to tell the killer the truth as to where his victim was to be found.
Although the killer’s interest in knowing the truth is not readily commensurable
with his intended victim’s interest in not being killed, our reﬂection upon how we
ourselves would wish to be treated by others enables us not only to discern these
interests but to rank them. Our rights are not absolute and the right not to be lied
to is no exception. There are worse things in life than lies.
One of the attractions of utilitarianism is that it offers a single yardstick by
which such incommensurable values as life and truth can be measured. However,
rights cannot be overridden merely by the fact that, in the circumstances, it would
be more useful not to respect them. It may be frustrating but there is no math-
ematical formula or single yardstick for the ordering of rights, nor can this ordering
be deduced from a still deeper, but as yet unarticulated set of policies.
Once the basic building blocks of moral rights given the force of law are in
place, judgment is then required as to the best way in which to put them together.
The same process of reﬂection, one case building on the last, enables a sophisti-
cated system to develop over time.
E. Why Don’t We Have the Rights We Don’t?
Why could there not be a legal right not to be caused economic loss (subject to
exceptions)? Why not a general right not to be caused harm? Why not a right not
to be insulted, as existed in Roman law? Why not a right against our spouses that
they do not commit adultery? Why is it that the common law generally only gives
effect to the negative formulation of the golden rule? Why not a right that others
take positive steps to assist us, particularly where it would not be onerous for them
to do so? There can be no simple answer to these questions as the varieties of legal
rights we could have are as many and varied as the wit of human imagination
Why Don’t We Have the Rights We Don’t?
337
³⁹ J Waldron ‘Rights in Conﬂict’ Ethics 99 (1989) 503.
⁴⁰ JL Mackie ‘Rights, Utility and Universalisation’ in RG Frey Utility and Rights (1985) 86.
allows. No refutation of all possibilities is therefore possible, but the most signiﬁ-
cant limitations can be articulated.
The law’s approach to moral rights takes one of three forms. First, the violation
of the right may be actionable per se. Secondly, the violation may only be action-
able if it has consequences, usually the suffering of loss. Thirdly the violation may
give rise to no remedy at all. Our right to freedom of movement falls into the ﬁrst
category, the right not to be lied to into the second, and the right not to be insulted
into the third. Some rights are more important than others. Assessing the weight
to be given to a right is, in part, a question of social fact which can differ from one
society to the next and can change over time. The Romans took insults more ser-
iously than does the common law (‘sticks and stones may break my bones’). The
general interest of privacy, and the various rights which protect it, are increasingly
taken more seriously by the law in a world where social conventions respecting
this interest have become weakened.
All of the rights suggested above could in theory be recognized and enforced by a
legal system. However, the broad rights, such as a right not to be caused economic
loss, are not rights which can be judicially created. The second stage in determining
the rights we do not have, goes back to the political and technical limits placed
upon judicial decision making. If the courts were to recognize a general right not to
be caused economic loss, prima facie all commercial competition or industrial
action would be actionable. It would therefore be necessary for the courts to deter-
mine what is fair and unfair competition, and what sort of industrial action it was
legitimate for a trade union to take. These are questions the court cannot give itself
the power to resolve. It is only in this indirect way that policy questions are import-
ant in determining the legal rights we have. Policy is relevant because it cannot
be relevant. The courts cannot create rights which require the answer to ques-
tions they cannot give. The conclusion, therefore, is the perhaps unhappy one that
because of the inherent limits on how judges can behave, the common law system
of rights will inevitably fall short of the ideal. There is only so far the judge can go.
Judges alone cannot create a just society. They cannot determine who should have
the right to vote, how levels of taxation should be ﬁxed, who should receive social
security payments, or what immigration controls, if any, should be in place.
If all insults were actionable, freedom of speech would be unacceptably curtailed
and the court would be forced to decide where legitimate political speech began
and ended. Similarly, how is a court to determine what constitutes acceptable con-
duct in a modern marriage? If we were under a general obligation to assist all other
persons, instead of liability being imposed for how we have chosen to act, the law
would be pursuing a policy of altruism to encourage useful intervention. Would
such a policy encourage altruism, or would the existence of a legal order to come
to the assistance of others undermine or mask our moral incentive to do so? It may
be doubted whether those who live in common law countries are less altruistic
than those who live in countries which impose positive legal duties to come to the
assistance of others, and the policy choice is not an obvious one.
Justice
338
Judicially created rights are, inevitably, minimalist in content; with a corre-
sponding maximalist approach to liberty of action. More generally, the judicially
created private rights at common law, which give legal force to our moral rights,
are concerned with maximizing the autonomy of each us by enabling the greatest
respect for one another, and how each of us chooses to live our lives. One example
of this premium placed on freedom of choice is our ability to waive all of our
rights. Indeed, the most signiﬁcant limit upon our ability to waive our rights, at
least in private law, is that we cannot waive our own ability to change our minds.
I can consent to having my ears pierced by a beautician, but I cannot irrevocably
give such permission, whether by contract or otherwise. If I communicate my
change of mind, it would be a battery if the beautician went ahead anyway. Slavery
is impossible not because it is impossible to agree to work for another and follow
his or her instructions, but because it is impossible irrevocably to bind oneself to
do so regardless of one’s future self’s choice. The protection of future choice is also
seen in the rights of children. Children have a much more limited ability to waive
their rights than do adults. A tattooist who tattoos a child commits a battery, how-
ever insistent the child is that he or she consents. This may be seen as protecting
the ability of the child’s future adult self to choose. We consider children to lack
the ability to choose, which we cannot deny to their future selves. The ability to
waive rights, even our right to life, indicates that the law is not protecting the sub-
ject matter of our rights as valuable in themselves, but rather as an indirect protec-
tion of autonomy. The absence of general positive duties to come to the assistance
of others similarly supports this conclusion.
Rights do not seek to maximize aggregate choice overall. One aspect of my right
to my land is that it removes your ability to choose for yourself whether to cross it.
Rather, rights enable each individual freedom to choose how to live his life.⁴¹
Further, the rule of law places limitations upon the sort of rights which can, or
at least should, be recognized.⁴² Although it would be possible to imagine rights
not to be insulted or rights against spouses that they do not commit adultery, it is
almost impossible to imagine how there could be a general right not to be care-
lessly caused loss or harm, with its boundaries determined by a rich array of policy
concerns.⁴³ It is part of the rule of law that the rights others have against us are
capable of being determined in advance. This is particularly important in relation
to rights exigible against the rest of the world. A close analogy is with the criminal
law. It would be theoretically possible to have a general offence of ‘misbehaviour’,
subject to a number of policy exceptions which it was the job of the court to assess
in each case. However, such a broad general offence would be unacceptable as it
Why Don’t We Have the Rights We Don’t?
339
⁴¹ This normative claim should not be confused with the analytic claim sometimes made that all
categories of Hohfeldian right share the characteristic that they protect the right-holder’s choices.
⁴² Cf J Henderson Jr ‘Expanding the Negligence Concept: Retreat from the Rule of Law’ (1976)
51 Indiana LJ 467.
⁴³ Contra D Howarth ‘Many Duties of Care—Or a Duty of Care? Notes from the Underground’
(2006) 26 OJLS 449.
could not be readily determined in advance what sort of conduct was an offence
and what was not.
In the law of property, the same idea is reﬂected in the numerus clausus prin-
ciple. Parties are not able to create any form of property right good against every-
one that they choose. The list is closed and determinate so that others are able to
anticipate in advance the content of the duties they are under and to whom they
are owed. If a court is required to determine the scope of parties’ rights and duties
according to the weighing of a disparate range of open-ended policy concerns, the
law itself is compromised. The approach within the law of property is but a species
of a more general rule. It is one thing for the law to be settled for the future by a
legislature creating rights determined by the weighing of policy concerns. It is
quite another for such policy concerns to be incorporated into the law itself, so
that parties in deciding how to act are required to guess in advance how they will
be resolved by a judge. It is within liability for negligence that the invocation of
such policy concerns is most prominent. Only if the duty of care is not a real duty,
enabling real persons to determine ex ante what they are free to do, but rather a
control device to be applied ex post in settling where losses fall, could it be thought
acceptable to incorporate such policy concerns into the deﬁnition of ‘duty’.
Justice
340
