3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 1 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
→
→
→
→
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0003
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter begins by tracing the development of the duty of care starting with the case of Donoghue v Stevenson [1932]. It 
goes on to consider the various general tests developed and used by the courts in order to establish when a duty of care is 
owed.
Keywords: 
tort law, duty of care, Donoghue v Stevenson, Caparo Industries v Dickman, Robinson v Chief Constable of West 
Yorkshire Police
3.1  Introduction
Consider the following examples:
A lorry driver crashes into a queue of traffic while talking on his mobile phone, killing the occupants of 
the car in front.
A nurse misreads a doctor’s handwriting and, as a result, gives a patient the wrong drug, causing them 
to suffer a serious allergic reaction.
A university law lecturer fails to check departmental files properly before writing a reference to 
accompany a student’s application to join an Inn of Court—unfortunately this means that a strong 
candidate ends up with a weak reference and their application is refused.
A school caretaker injures their back falling off a stepladder while putting up decorations for the end of 
term play—the stepladder had not been properly maintained by their employer.
p. 56
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 2 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
In each of these cases the defendant owes the claimant a duty of care. The concept of the duty of care is 
central to the tort of negligence. It is one of three elements in the tort of negligence—the first ‘hurdle’ if you 
like—that must be established in order for a claim to be successful. Carelessness alone does not give rise to 
liability. The defendant must not only be careless but also in a relationship to the claimant where their 
carelessness carries legal consequences. If the defendant does not owe a duty of care to the claimant, then the 
defendant will not be liable regardless of how carelessly they acted and how much loss they caused to the 
claimant. In such cases, there is no need to address the other elements of a negligence claim—that is breach, 
causation and remoteness. Moreover, the duty of care must be owed in respect of the particular type of harm (or 
injury) suffered—a defendant may owe the claimant a duty of care in respect of one type of loss (e.g. bodily 
injury) but not in respect of another (e.g. economic loss).
It is usually clear when a duty of care is owed. We know, for example, that an employer owes their employees 
a duty of care not to cause them foreseeable physical and psychiatric injury at work; that a driver owes a 
similar duty to other road users, and others in their vicinity; and that a doctor owes a duty to their patients (in 
both treating and, increasingly, advising them). In these, and many other cases, a duty of care is established 
by clear precedent: the courts have long recognised duties of care in these situations. Accordingly, in a road 
traffic accident case the key issue is not likely to be whether the defendant owed the claimant a duty 
↵
of care, but rather whether they have breached this duty by falling below the standard of care expected 
in all the circumstances of the case.1
On occasion, however, cases arise where the question of whether a duty of care exists is not answered by 
precedent. In these ‘novel’ cases, the question for the court is whether the law should recognise a duty of care 
on such facts. To answer this question, the courts have made numerous attempts to identify a general ‘test’ 
which can be used to identify when duties of care will arise. However, as we shall see, none of these attempts 
have been altogether successful.
Nonetheless, this uncertainty about what general test or approach courts should take when faced with novel 
cases does not mean that there is significant uncertainty about when duties of care arise. Most cases are not 
novel but are covered by precedent. Accordingly, when considering whether a duty of care is owed, the 
starting point is always to look to existing precedent. If the cases give a clear answer one way or the other— 
that is, if they indicate that a duty is or is not owed—then that is the end of the matter. It is only in those rare, 
but nonetheless significant, cases where the precedents give no clear answer that the courts need to resort to 
a more general test or approach.
One thing which follows from what we have said already is that there is no universal duty to take care not to 
harm or injure each other. The law does not always require us to show reasonable care for those who may be 
harmed—however foreseeably—by our conduct. Indeed, the duty of care concept is seen by many as a sort of 
control device, which the courts employ to limit the scope of negligence liability. As Peter Cane and James 
Goudkamp note:
[W]hereas Lord Atkin seems to have put forward the neighbour principle as a way of expanding the 
scope of liability for negligence, the duty of care concept is most commonly used in modern cases as 
a means of justifying refusal to impose liability. (emphasis added)2
p. 57
1
2
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 3 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
There are a number of situations where the law either denies a duty of care outright or makes establishing 
such a duty more onerous for claimants.3 These relate to particular types of harm (e.g. where the defendant’s 
actions cause psychiatric injury or economic loss), how the harm is suffered (e.g. where the claimant’s loss or 
injury has been caused by the acts of a third party or through an omission rather than a positive act) and who 
the defendant is (e.g. where the defendant is a public body—such as a local authority, the police or other 
emergency services). This, of course, prompts a further question as to why the courts might wish to deny a 
duty of care in such cases.
There are a number of reasons why the courts might be reluctant to impose a duty of care. These include a 
wish to avoid imposing so-called ‘crushing’ liability on a particular individual or class of defendants—that is, 
‘liability in an indeterminate amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class’ (Ultramares 
Corporation v Touche, Niven & Co [1931]). A related wish may also be to prevent a ‘flood’ of claims—either in 
relation to one specific event or, more generally, in relation to a particular type of injury—which may in turn 
clog up or slow down the tort system as a mechanism for compensation. The courts may also wish to seek to 
avoid the more negative aspects of deterrence—that is, the danger of ‘overkill’—whereby beneficial yet 
‘risky’ activities are restricted due to the over-self-regulation of would-be defendants. Finally, the courts 
may recognise that in some circumstances there is nothing wrong with the 
↵
sort of harm the defendant 
has caused—that is, that it is sometimes entirely reasonable to act in ways that leave others worse off.4 For 
example, failing a student’s exam paper will inevitably leave them worse off both in terms of their future 
employment prospects as well as their current mental state. However, the examiner (assuming the paper is 
not of a sufficient standard to pass) is under no duty to prevent this from happening by not failing the 
student.5
Pause for reflection
There are differing views as to the role of the duty of care.
Peter Cane and James Goudkamp argue that the main function of the duty of care element in the tort 
of negligence is to:
define the boundaries of liability for damage caused by negligent conduct by reference to 
what are commonly called ‘policy considerations’ … To say that a person owes a duty of care 
means (and means only) that the person will be liable for causing damage by negligence in 
that situation.6
Nicholas McBride disagrees. He argues that tort law’s regulatory function—that is, the extent to 
which tort law tells people how they ought to behave—is at least as important. On this view, it is 
wrong to say the imposition of a duty of care ‘means only’ that the defendant will be liable for 
carelessly harming the claimant. Rather we should take the notion of a duty of care—and its 
requirement and direction that a defendant act with reasonable care—seriously.7
3
p. 58
4
5
6
7
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 4 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
This distinction, described by McBride as that between those who adopt a ‘cynical’ as opposed to 
‘idealist’ view of the tort of negligence, is an important one. On one view tort law is about attributing 
or shifting losses, and hence the key question is: Do we want to impose liability in these 
circumstances, on this defendant, for this injury? On this basis the purpose of the duty of care inquiry 
is simply to weigh up the pros and cons of requiring the defendant to bear the claimant’s losses. By 
contrast, the idealist view suggests that tort law is concerned primarily with telling people how they 
may and may not act. So, to impose a duty of care on a defendant is not simply to say that they will be 
liable if they carelessly injure someone, but that they must actually ‘take care’.
Keep this distinction in mind as you read more about the tort of negligence and, particularly, when 
reading Chapters 4 to 7, which deal with the types of claim in which the courts have struggled with 
whether and when to find a duty of care. To what extent, if any, can the distinction between the 
‘cynical’ and ‘idealist’ views on negligence provide an explanation for some of the courts’ more 
controversial decisions in relation to establishing a duty of care?
3.2  Establishing a duty of care
As noted in section 3.1, there has been some uncertainty about what general test or approach courts should 
take when faced with so-called novel cases, which is to say those rare, but important, cases in which there is 
no existing precedent on whether a duty of care arises. In such cases, the court needs to determine whether a 
duty of care should be recognised. Over the years the courts have adopted various approaches. Given that to a 
large extent these build on and respond to each other it is worth looking at these in turn.
3.2.1  From Donoghue to Anns
The starting point in any consideration of the concept of a duty of care is Donoghue v Stevenson [1932]. As 
discussed in Chapter 2, Donoghue is now understood as setting down a single, general test which could be 
applied in all cases to answer the question as to whether a duty was owed in the form of Lord Atkin’s 
‘neighbour principle’:
You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be 
likely to injure your neighbour. Who then, in law, is my neighbour? The answer seems to be persons 
who are so closely and directly affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in 
contemplation as being so affected when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are 
called in question. (at 580)
The basic test here is that, for a duty of care to arise, the claimant must fall within a class of individuals put at 
foreseeable risk by the defendant’s action. It follows that duties of care are claimant-specific: the defendant 
does not owe a duty of care to the world at large. An example of this point is Haley v London Electricity Board 
[1965]. In this case, the claimant, who was blind, tripped over a hammer which had been placed on the 
p. 59
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 5 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
pavement by the defendant to prevent pedestrians from walking along the pavement as they carried out their 
work. As a result of the fall the claimant became almost totally deaf. The defendants argued that it was not in 
their ‘reasonable contemplation’ that a blind person would be walking along the pavement. The House of 
Lords disagreed. Finding for the claimant, it held that the question of whether harm was reasonably 
foreseeable needed to factor in the characteristics of all those who might reasonably be expected to walk 
along the pavement—including blind pedestrians:
In deciding what is reasonably foreseeable one must have regard to common knowledge … No doubt 
there are many places open to the public where for one reason or another one would be surprised to 
see a blind person walking alone, but a city pavement is not one of them. (Lord Reid at 791)
For some, Lord Atkin’s neighbourhood principle is ‘extraordinarily empty’.8 It simply prompts the question: 
what is, or ought to be, reasonably foreseeable? This is something which may ultimately depend on the 
imagination of the individual judge; what one judge may believe to be reasonably foreseeable, another may 
consider unusual and so on. Yet this requirement that harm be reasonably foreseeable before a duty of care is 
recognised has been the one constant in a period where much of the law of negligence has been in flux. And, 
↵
while determining what harms are reasonably foreseeable is a question on which different people will 
sometimes come to different conclusions, the law cannot sensibly expect us to take care in respect of risks we 
could not reasonably have anticipated.
Pause for reflection
One constant in the quest for a general test for establishing duties of care is the requirement of 
foreseeability—that is, the claimant must be said to fall into a particular class of people in relation to 
whom it is reasonably foreseeable that the defendant’s failure to take care could cause them damage. 
However, as we shall see, foreseeability also crops up as a requirement or relevant factor in other 
elements of the tort of negligence.
To recap, establishing a claim in negligence requires the claimant to prove not just that the defendant 
owed them a duty of care, but also that the defendant breached that duty, that the breach caused the 
claimant a loss and that this loss is not too remote. When we come to look at breach, in Chapter 8, we 
shall see that one of the key factors in determining whether the defendant did indeed act reasonably is 
the likelihood and gravity of the harm that could reasonably have been foreseen—so, for instance, the 
greater the likelihood of harm, the more care we expect the defendant to take to prevent it (Overseas 
Tankship (UK) Ltd v Miller Steamship Co Pty Ltd (The Wagon Mound) (No 2) [1967]). Moreover, when 
determining whether the loss suffered by the claimant is too remote, we again turn to reasonable 
foreseeability—a loss is too remote if it was not reasonably foreseeable that a loss of that kind might 
follow from the defendant’s breach (Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock and Engineering Co (The 
Wagon Mound) (No 1) [1961]).9
8
p. 60
9
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 6 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
This all appears rather confusing. If the claimant’s loss was not reasonably foreseeable, then no duty 
of care can arise and their claim will fail before we get to questions of breach, causation and 
remoteness. By contrast, if a court has held that harm was reasonably foreseeable when looking at 
whether a duty arose, then it seems unnecessary to re-inquire into foreseeability when looking at 
breach and remoteness since that issue has already been addressed at the duty stage. To put much the 
same point another way, if it is held that the claimant’s loss was not a reasonably foreseeable 
consequence of the defendant’s carelessness, then it seems we can deny their claim on a variety of 
grounds: we could say that no duty was owed, that the defendant was not in breach or that the 
claimant’s loss was too remote.
So, not only does it seem as though we are asking the same question two or three times but this also 
appears to muddy the relationship between the supposedly distinct elements of a negligence claim. 
The same point has on occasion been made by the courts. For instance in Lamb v Camden London 
Borough Council [1981] Lord Denning MR had this to say:
The truth is that all these three, duty, remoteness and causation, are all devices by which the 
courts limit the range of liability for negligence … As I have said … ‘it is not every 
consequence of a wrongful act which is the subject of compensation’. The law has to draw a 
line somewhere. Sometimes it is done by limiting the range of persons to whom a duty is 
owed. Sometimes it is done by saying that there is a break in the chain of causation. 
↵
At other times it is done by saying that the consequence is too remote to be a head of 
damage. All these devices are useful in their way. But ultimately it is a question of policy for 
the judges to decide. (at 636)
The best way to make sense of this all is to understand that at each stage—duty, breach, remoteness 
—we are, or should be, asking a slightly different question in relation to foreseeability. So, at the duty 
stage, we are asking whether harm of some broad variety—personal injury, psychiatric harm, 
property damage, pure economic loss, etc—was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the 
defendant’s carelessness. If a duty is established, we move on to breach. This involves asking whether 
the foreseeable harm was sufficiently grave or likely that the defendant should have done more than 
they did to avoid it happening. As such, the inquiry into foreseeability here is a little more detailed or 
focused—we are asking not only ‘Was harm foreseeable?’ but ‘How likely was it that harm might be 
caused?’ and ‘How serious was the harm that the defendant could reasonably have foreseen?’ Finally, 
when addressing remoteness, we are looking at the foreseeability of the specific harms that the 
claimant did in fact suffer. So, while at the duty stage we ask whether, for instance, physical harm, as 
broadly defined, was foreseeable, when turning to remoteness we look at the precise injury suffered 
by the claimant (and sometimes, too, the way in which they were injured), and we ask whether this 
was the type of physical harm that could reasonably have been foreseen (see e.g. Tremain v Pike [1969] 
and Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963], although compare Page v Smith [1996]).
p. 61
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 7 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Lord Atkin’s neighbourhood principle from Donoghue was subsequently restated and refined in the dictum of 
Lord Wilberforce in Anns v Merton London Borough Council [1978]:
… the question has to be approached in two stages. First one has to ask whether, as between the 
alleged wrongdoer and the person who has suffered damage there is a sufficient relationship of 
proximity or neighbourhood such that, in the reasonable contemplation of the former, carelessness 
on his part may be likely to cause damage to the latter, in which case a prima facie duty of care 
arises. Secondly, if the first question is answered affirmatively, it is necessary to consider whether 
there are any considerations which ought to negative, or to reduce or limit the scope of the duty or 
the class of person to whom it is owed or the damages to which a breach of it may give rise. (at 751– 
2)
So, on this reformulation of the test, the defendant owes the claimant a duty to take reasonable care (provided 
that it was reasonably foreseeable that a failure to take reasonable care by the defendant would cause damage 
to the claimant) unless there is some policy reason why, nonetheless, no duty should be held to be owed. This 
prompted Lord Goff in Smith v Littlewoods [1987] to acknowledge ‘the broad general principle of liability for 
foreseeable damage is so widely applicable that the function of the duty of care is not so much to identify 
cases where liability is imposed as to identify those where it is not’ (at 280).
Under the Anns test, the only positive reason needed to support the recognition of a duty of care was that 
harm to the claimant was indeed reasonably foreseeable. This first stage was pretty easy to satisfy—almost 
everything is foreseeable if you think about it long enough. Now, the second stage meant that courts were not 
compelled to find duties of care simply on account of the harm being reasonably foreseeable. However, the 
way the test was formulated 
↵
created a sort of presumption that, if harm was reasonably foreseeable, 
then a duty of care was owed. As such, a defendant seeking to argue that he owed no duty faced an uphill 
battle, since they had to convince the court why they, exceptionally, should be permitted to cause careless 
harm.
The end result was an unprecedented, and increasingly unpopular, expansion of the tort of negligence in the 
late 1970s and early 1980s during which the courts seemed reluctant to refuse claims of any vaguely 
sympathetic claimant who came before them (see e.g. Lord Roskill’s opinion in Junior Books v Veitchi [1983]). 
Accordingly, Lord Wilberforce’s two-stage test soon fell into disfavour. It was rejected in Yuen Kun-yeu v 
Attorney General of Hong Kong [1987] and Anns itself was subsequently overruled by Murphy v Brentwood 
District Council [1991].10
Counterpoint
Though many modern accounts of negligence fail to acknowledge this, the decision in Anns was not 
universally derided. Indeed, in Ravenscroft v Rederiaktiebolaget Transatlantic [1991] (decided after Anns 
was overruled in Murphy) Ward J had this to say:
p. 62
10
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 8 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
As I have tried to navigate my fragile craft to judgment, I have become aware that it is a tidal 
sea which flows as causes of action are extended and then ebbs as limitations are placed upon 
them. I can only console myself that if I am cast up among the flotsam and jetsam at the high 
water mark on the beach, I shall lie, I hope unnoticed but among such battered treasures as 
Anns v Merton London Borough Council. (at 76)
Moreover, it is far from clear that the test in Anns necessitated any expansion of liability. It may be that 
it was a victim of association—a casualty of the backlash against an increasing number of decisions 
(e.g. McLoughlin v O’Brian [1982]; Home Office v Dorset Yacht Co [1970]; even the decision in Anns 
itself) which appeared to threaten the principles of individual freedom and responsibility at a time 
when these were high on the political and governmental agenda.11
What do you think led the courts to the conclusion that the potential for liability had become too 
widespread? Think, in particular, about the so-called ‘problematic’ duty situations in relation to 
omissions, pure economic loss, public authorities, psychiatric harm and so on.
Check our pointers <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-  
resources/horsey9e-chapter-3-pointers-to-pause-for-reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes? 
options=showName> on how to answer the questions posed in this ‘Pause for reflection’.
3.2.2  Caparo Industries v Dickman
In Caparo Industries plc v Dickman [1990]12 the House of Lords sought to move away from the position of 
Donoghue and Anns whereby foreseeability of damage was enough to raise a prima facie duty of care, which 
would be negated only if there were public policy considerations which militated against such a duty. But, 
more than that, the court cast doubt on the broader idea which motivated Lord Atkin’s judgment in 
Donoghue: that there must be some general test which can determine when duties of care are owed.
↵
The more difficult question was this: once the tests in Donoghue and Anns were rejected what was to be 
put in their place? An attempt to answer this question was given by Lord Bridge who suggested:
… in addition to the foreseeability of damage, necessary ingredients in any situation giving rise to a 
duty of care are that there should exist between the party owing the duty and the party to whom it is 
owed a relationship characterised by the law as one of ‘proximity’ or ‘neighbourhood’ and that the 
situation should be one in which the court considers it fair, just and reasonable that the law should 
impose a duty of a given scope on the one party for the benefit of the other. (at 617)
11
12
p. 63
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 9 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Later courts, wrongly, came to treat this passage as setting down a new ‘three-stage test’ which must be 
applied to determine whether a duty of care arises. On this understanding, to know whether the defendant 
owes the claimant a duty of care we need to answer three questions: (1) Was it reasonably foreseeable that the 
defendant’s failure to take care could cause damage to the claimant? (2) Was there a relationship of proximity 
between the claimant and the defendant? And (3) Is it fair, just and reasonable that the law should recognise a 
duty on the defendant to take reasonable care not to cause that damage to the claimant? Only if the answer to 
all three questions is ‘yes’ would a duty of care be found.
While the first asks the familiar question of whether the claimant fell within a class of individuals put at 
foreseeable risk by the defendant’s action, the second and third questions marked a departure from the Anns 
test. Though the language of ‘proximity’ was used in Anns and indeed in Donoghue, it appears that Lord 
Wilberforce, and (less clearly) Lord Atkin, did not intend the term to add anything to the notion of reasonable 
foreseeability. In other words, to say that there was ‘proximity’ between the claimant and defendant was to 
say no more than that it was reasonably foreseeable that the defendant’s carelessness could cause the 
claimant harm. As such, ‘proximity’ did not describe an additional hurdle or requirement to the requirement 
of reasonable foreseeability. Caparo changed this. By employing ‘proximity’ as a second, additional, element 
to the test for establishing the existence of a duty of care, the House of Lords was understood as having meant 
something more than simple reasonable foreseeability of harm. But, initially, Caparo itself tells us very little 
about what precise relationship or connection amounts to a relationship of proximity on any given set of 
facts. Rather ‘proximity’, in Lord Oliver’s words, is a ‘convenient expression so long as it is realised that it is 
no more than a label which embraces not a definable concept but merely a description of circumstances from 
which, pragmatically, the courts conclude that a duty of care exists’ (at 632). The difficulty lies then—in the 
absence of a single or definable idea or test through which to establish proximity—in identifying what this 
alternative understanding of proximity is and hence how to determine when it is present.
Clearly proximity does not describe simple physical closeness—a defendant can owe a duty of care to a 
claimant who is many miles away (indeed in Donoghue itself the claimant and defendant were not close in 
space or time). Rather proximity is perhaps better understood, to use Alistair Mullis and Ken Oliphant’s 
expression, as a ‘legal term of art’;13 a generic 
↵
name for the more specific tests through which the 
existence of a duty of care is established in particular cases.14 Similarly, in Stovin v Wise [1996] Lord Nicholls 
stated:
[The Caparo] formulation tends to suggest that proximity is a separate ingredient, distinct from 
fairness and reasonableness, and capable of being identified by some other criteria. This is not so. 
Proximity is a slippery word. Proximity is not legal shorthand for a concept with its own, objectively 
identifiable characteristics. Proximity is convenient shorthand for a relationship between two 
parties which makes it fair and reasonable one should owe the other a duty of care. This is only 
another way of saying that when assessing the requirements of fairness and reasonableness regard 
must be had to the relationship of the parties. (at 932)
On this view the proximity requirement simply tells us that, before a duty of care can arise, a certain type of 
relationship or connection must exist between the parties. Donoghue and Anns both suggested that the only 
connection or relationship that needed to exist between the parties was that it was reasonably foreseeable 
13
p. 64
14
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 10 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
that the claimant might be harmed by the defendant’s carelessness. However, Caparo tells us that this is not 
true (since otherwise this second stage of the Caparo ‘test’ would add nothing to the first) and that something 
more is needed. However, it does not say what this ‘something more’ is.
The final stage of the Caparo ‘test’—that is, whether it is fair, just and reasonable to find that the defendant 
owed the claimant a duty to take reasonable care not to cause them damage—returns, once again, to notions 
of policy. It has been argued that this leaves the courts with an inevitable ‘residual discretion as to whether or 
not a duty of care should be recognised’.15 Traditionally, judges have sought to play down this aspect of their 
role (especially during the period of retreat following Anns). However, more recently, they have been more 
willing to engage in frank discussion of the various policy factors which weigh for and against the imposition 
of a duty of care. Indeed, in Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales Police [2015] Lord Kerr (in dissent) 
appeared to suggest not only that a decision whether or not to impose a duty of care was necessarily informed 
by ‘preponderant policy considerations’ but that these might change over time:
As to what is ‘fair, just and reasonable’, Lord Browne-Wilkinson in Barrett v Enfield London Borough 
Council [2001] 2 AC 550, explained:
In English law the decision as to whether it is fair, just and reasonable to impose a liability in 
negligence on a particular class of would-be defendants depends on weighing in the balance 
the total detriment to the public interest in all cases from holding such class liable in 
negligence as against the total loss to all would-be plaintiffs if they are not to have a cause of 
action in respect of the loss they have individually suffered. (at 559)
This passage clearly contemplates that, in deciding what is ‘fair, just and reasonable’, courts are 
called on to make judgments that are informed by what they consider to be preponderant policy 
considerations. Some assessment has to be made of what a judge considers the public interest to be; 
what detriment would be caused to that interest if liability were held to exist; and what harm would 
be done to claimants if they are denied a remedy for the loss that they have suffered. These 
calculations are not conducted according to fixed principle. They will frequently, if not indeed 
usually, be made without empirical evidence. For the most part, they will be instinctual reactions to 
any given set of circumstances. …
↵
It is, I believe, important to be alive to the true nature of these decisions, especially when one 
comes to consider the precedent value of earlier cases in which such judgments have been made. A 
decision based on what is considered to be correct legal principle cannot be lightly set aside in 
subsequent cases where the same legal principle is in play. By contrast, a decision which is not the 
product of, in the words of Lord Oliver, ‘any logical process of analogical deduction’ holds less sway, 
particularly if it does not accord with what the subsequent decision-maker considers to be the 
correct instinctive reaction to contemporaneous standards and conditions. Put bluntly, what one 
group of judges felt was the correct policy answer in 2009 should not bind another group of judges, 
even as little as five years later. (at [159]–[161])
15
p. 65
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 11 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
The three-stage test or approach Caparo stands for has, for some time now, been a matter of some 
controversy. Lord Bridge’s ‘unwisely aphoristic’16 statement in Caparo—requiring (1) reasonable 
foreseeability of harm; (2) a relationship of proximity between claimant and defendant; and (3) the 
recognition that the imposition of a duty of care would be fair, just and reasonable—was commonly 
thought to set down a new test to determine when a duty of care is owed in so-called novel cases. It 
does not. And you should certainly resist the temptation to apply this as a stand-alone test for the 
existence of a duty of care in negligence.
However, the main difficulty with the three-stage formulation, and indeed Caparo itself, is that it tells 
us remarkably little about when a duty of care will arise or even how courts should go about 
determining when such duties arise. Yet this is the very thing a general test for establishing duties of 
care should do. However, what is striking when one reads the judgments in Caparo is that the House 
of Lords made clear that it was not intending to set down a test that could be used by courts in future 
cases to provide concrete answers to whether a duty of care arose on a given set of facts. On the 
contrary, the House of Lords in Caparo clearly took the view that it was impossible to find any single 
test which, in practice, could be used to identify those situations in which a duty of care will be owed. 
Lord Oliver put it thus:
I think that it has to be recognised that to search for any single formula which will serve as a 
general test of liability is to pursue a will-o’-the wisp. The fact is that once one discards, as it 
is now clear one must, the concept of foreseeability of harm as the single exclusive test, even 
a prima facie test, of the existence of the duty of care, the attempt to state some general 
principle which will determine liability in an infinite variety of circumstances serves not to 
clarify the law but merely to bedevil its development in a way which corresponds with 
practicality and common sense. (at 632)
Moreover, not only did the House of Lords reject the possibility of formulating any single, practicable 
test, they also went on to deny the utility of the very concepts of ‘proximity’ and ‘fairness, justice and 
reasonableness’ that are employed in the so-called three-stage test:
[T]he concepts of proximity and fairness embodied in these additional ingredients are not 
susceptible of any such precise definition as would be necessary to give them utility as 
practical tests, but amount in effect to little more than convenient labels to attach 
↵
to 
the features of different specific situations in which, on a detailed examination of all the 
circumstances, the law recognises pragmatically as giving rise to a duty of a given scope. 
(Lord Bridge at 618)
Lord Oliver said something similar:
16
p. 66
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 12 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Indeed it is difficult to resist a conclusion that what have been treated as three separate 
requirements are, at least in most cases, in fact merely facets of the same thing, for in some 
cases the degree of foreseeability is such that it is from that alone that the requisite 
proximity can be deduced, whilst in others the absence of that essential relationship can 
most rationally be attributed simply to the court’s view that it would not be fair and 
reasonable to hold the defendant responsible. ‘Proximity’ is, no doubt, a convenient 
expression so long as it is realised that it is no more than a label which embraces not a 
definable concept but merely a description of circumstances from which, pragmatically, the 
courts conclude that a duty of care exists. (at 633)
Accordingly, though many lawyers, judges—and tort textbook writers—came to view Caparo as 
setting down a new test which they must apply when working out when duties of care arise, this was 
not just a misreading of the judgments in Caparo but indeed the very opposite of what the court had 
intended.
More recently, the Supreme Court has sought to resurrect and restate the true message of Caparo. The point 
was emphasised by Lord Toulson in Michael v Chief Constable of Wales [2015] when he noted that 
‘[p]aradoxically, … Lord Bridge’s speech has sometimes come to be treated as a blueprint for deciding cases, 
despite the pains which the author took to make clear that it was not intended to be any such thing’ (at 
[106]). And again in Robinson v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [2018] where Lord Reed noted:
The proposition that there is a Caparo test which applies to all claims in the modern law of 
negligence, and that in consequence the court will only impose a duty of care where it considers it 
fair, just and reasonable to do so on the particular facts, is mistaken. As Lord Toulson JSC pointed out 
in his landmark judgment in Michael v Chief Constable of Wales [2015] … that understanding of the 
case mistakes the whole point of the Caparo case, which was to repudiate the idea that there is a 
single test which can be applied in all cases in order to determine whether a duty of care exists, and 
instead to adopt an approach based, in the manner characteristic of the common law, on precedent, 
and on the development of the law incrementally and by analogy with established authorities. (at 
[21])
Tests—three-staged or otherwise—aside, one thing Caparo does is to change the starting point from which 
decisions on whether the defendant owes the claimant a duty to take reasonable care not to cause them injury 
are made. For Lord Wilberforce in Anns, showing that it was reasonably foreseeable that the defendant’s 
carelessness would harm the claimant was enough to establish a ‘prima facie’ duty of care. As we have seen, 
this effectively adopted a presumption that where harm was reasonably foreseeable, a duty of care would be 
owed. Of course, this presumption could be rebutted. Accordingly, the second stage of the Anns test asked 
whether there were policy considerations which nonetheless required the court to deny a duty of care. But 
this way of structuring the inquiry was significant. The test suggested that, all else being equal, a duty of care 
would be owed wherever it was reasonably 
↵
foreseeable that the defendant’s carelessness could harm the 
p. 67
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 13 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
claimant and it was only in those (apparently) exceptional cases where policy considerations pointing against 
the imposition of a duty were sufficiently weighty, that a duty of care would nonetheless be denied. Caparo 
rejects this view. Instead the court must weigh up all the applicable reasons and arguments for and against 
recognising a duty of care. A duty of care will be found only if the court considers that, on balance, the 
combined reasons in favour of a duty of care are stronger than the combined reasons against, with no 
presumption that a duty will be owed when harm is foreseeable.
Pause for reflection
As we have noted, the House of Lords in Caparo was determined to effect a shift away from the 
position of Donoghue and Anns whereby foreseeability of damage was enough to raise a prima facie 
duty of care, which would be negated only if there were public policy considerations which militated 
against such a duty. Do you think this shift has gone too far? After all, as Lord Browne-Wilkinson 
reminded us, in X (Minors) v Bedfordshire County Council, we should not lose sight of the compensatory 
purposes of the tort of negligence:
the public policy consideration which has first claim on the loyalty of the law is that wrongs 
should be remedied and that very potent counter-considerations are required to override 
that policy. (at 749)
Lord Dyson, in Jones v Kaney [2011], made a similar point:
The general rule that where there is a wrong there should be a remedy is a cornerstone of 
any system of justice. To deny a remedy to the victim of a wrong should always be regarded 
as exceptional. As has been frequently stated, any justification must be necessary and 
requires strict and cogent justification … If the position were otherwise, the law would be 
irrational and unfair and public confidence in it would be undermined. (at [113])
Think about Caparo and the cases that have followed it (discussed in the following chapters). Are the 
courts now paying too little attention to the principle that carelessly caused injuries should be 
compensated?
3.2.3  Robinson and the incremental approach
While the Supreme Court in Robinson is clear that we should not think of Caparo as setting down a test which 
can tell us when duties of care are owed, what does Caparo have to say to courts faced with novel cases, when 
the existing precedents do not give an answer to the question of whether a duty of care is owed?
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 14 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The principal steer Caparo gives to the courts came in its approval of a dictum of Brennan J in the Australian 
case of Sutherland Shire Council v Heyman [1985]: ‘It is preferable, in my view, that the law should develop 
novel categories of negligence incrementally and by analogy with established categories’ (at 481). This 
describes what has become known as the incremental approach. According to this approach, the courts 
should identify duties of care not by seeking a high-level, universal test of the kind the House of Lords 
attempted to 
↵
formulate in Donoghue and Anns. Rather, their focus should be on the existing case law 
and the factual circumstances in which duties of care have already been found, and to work outwards from 
them. As Lord Bridge noted, this heralds a return to the pre-Donoghue approach and ‘the more traditional 
categorisation of distinct and recognisable situations as guides to the existence, the scope and the limits of 
the varied duties of care which the law imposes’ (Caparo at 618).
Pause for reflection
The suggestion that we should recognise duties of care in situations identical or analogous to those 
where the courts have recognised a duty of care previously (and that we should reject duties of care in 
situations where the courts have previously denied their existence) is clearly sensible and is hardly 
revolutionary. This is, one might say, just ordinary common law reasoning. The problem with this 
approach is what might be thought to be its implication: that, where no analogy can be found—that 
is, where there is no previously decided case analogous to the case at hand—a duty of care will be 
denied since the recognition of a duty of care cannot be understood as an incremental development of 
the law from existing, analogous authorities. In other words, if the law is to develop incrementally, we 
can only recognise duties of care in situations analogous to those where a duty of care has already 
been recognised.
But, if this is true, it then means that the outcome of cases depends not upon legal principle and the 
substantive merits of the case but upon the accidents of legal history—that is, on whether you are 
fortunate enough that an analogous case has already been decided by the courts. If we take the 
incremental approach seriously, where a party is unfortunate enough to suffer an injury in a truly 
novel way, so that no case similar to theirs has been brought to court before, then their claim will fail 
not because it is unmeritorious but for the simple (and highly unsatisfactory) reason that they are the 
first person to bring such a claim. Indeed, it is just this type of arbitrary and unfair result that the 
majority of the House of Lords in Donoghue rejected. The incremental approach appears to invite us to 
say that the minority in that case were right after all.17
Perhaps unsurprisingly, in the years following Caparo the courts showed little enthusiasm for this approach, 
or at least the implication that really novel cases will lose out by reason of their novelty alone. For instance, in 
Marc Rich & Co v Bishop Rock Marine Co Ltd [1996] (also known as The Nicholas H) the House of Lords, faced 
with a novel type of negligence claim, effectively sidelined the incremental by analogy approach on the basis 
that, if there had been no analogous cases previously decided, then the past cases could offer no guidance 
p. 68
17
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 15 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
either way as to whether a duty should be held to exist. Instead, the court decided the case pragmatically by 
analysing the reasons for and against the recognition of a duty and deciding whether on balance a duty ought 
to be recognised (albeit while using the language of fairness, justice and reasonableness).
↵
More recently, however, the Supreme Court has endorsed what might be considered a refined version of 
the incremental approach. In Robinson v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire Police, Lord Reed held that it was 
the incremental approach, not the supposed three-stage test, which Caparo should be understood to stand for 
and it is this approach which courts should employ when dealing with novel claims (at [25]). But, in so doing, 
he did not endorse what we described as the apparent implication of this approach: that truly novel claims fail 
simply by reason of their novelty. Rather he stated that ‘the drawing of an analogy depends on identifying the 
legally significant features of the situations with which the earlier authorities were concerned’ (at [27]). He 
continued:
Properly understood, the Caparo case … achieves a balance between legal certainty and justice. In the 
ordinary run of cases, courts consider what has been decided previously and follow the precedents 
(unless it is necessary to consider whether the precedents should be departed from). In cases where 
the question whether a duty of care arises has not previously been decided, the courts will consider 
the closest analogies in the existing law, with a view to maintaining the coherence of the law and the 
avoidance of inappropriate distinctions. They will also weigh up the reasons for and against 
imposing liability, in order to decide whether the existence of a duty of care would be just and 
reasonable. (at [29])
The clear suggestion here, then, is that even truly novel cases are to be decided on their merits, and the 
incremental approach is not a direction to courts to treat novelty alone as a basis for denying duties of care. 
On the contrary, courts faced with novel claims still have, in the end, to make a judgement of justness and 
reasonableness. But this judgement is to be made not by straight appeal to high principle but via a 
consideration of whatever analogous cases we can find (remembering that analogy is a matter of degree) and 
the more fact-specific considerations these cases identify.
In this way, Robinson seeks to reassert the true message of Caparo. Lord Reed reiterated this point in the later 
case of Poole Borough Council v GN [2019]:
Robinson did not lay down any new principle of law … the decision explained, as Michael had 
previously done, that Caparo did not impose a universal tripartite test for the existence of a duty of 
care, but recommended an incremental approach to novel situations, based on the use of established 
categories of liability as guides, by analogy, to the existence and scope of a duty of care in cases 
which fall outside them. The question whether the imposition of a duty of care would be fair, just 
and reasonable forms part of the assessment of whether such an incremental step ought to be taken. 
(at [64])18
p. 69
18
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 16 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
But Robinson also emphasises Caparo’s limited role. As Lord Reed makes clear, if there is a previous decision 
which does cover the case at hand, then the court can say whether or not there is a duty of care by direct 
appeal to the precedent and so without any need to have recourse to Caparo. Indeed, one of the important 
messages of Robinson is that courts not only do not need to resort to Caparo when a case falls within an 
established duty situation; they should not do so. This was true in Robinson itself.
Robinson v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [2018] UKSC 4 (SC)
The claimant, an elderly woman, was knocked to the ground and injured when two police officers 
attempted to arrest a suspected drug dealer. Her claim was dismissed at trial on the basis that the 
police had an immunity against claims in negligence. The Court of Appeal rejected her appeal on the 
grounds that the police generally owe no duty of care to members of the public and that, on the facts, 
there was no proximity between the parties and it would not be fair, just and reasonable to impose 
such a duty. The Supreme Court allowed the claimant’s appeal, holding that the defendants both owed 
and breached a duty of care to the claimant. Lord Reed gave the lead judgment:
Applying the approach adopted in the Caparo case, there are many situations in which it has 
been clearly established that a duty of care is or is not owed: for example, by motorists to 
other road users, by manufacturers to consumers, by employers to their employees, and by 
doctors to their patients. As Lord Browne-Wilkinson explained in Barrett v Enfield London 
Borough Council [2001] 2 AC 550:
Once the decision is taken that, say, company auditors though liable to shareholders 
for negligent auditing are not liable to those proposing to invest in the company … 
that decision will apply to all future cases of the same kind. (at 559–60)
Where the existence or non-existence of a duty of care has been established, a consideration 
of justice and reasonableness forms part of the basis on which the law has arrived at the 
relevant principles. It is therefore unnecessary and inappropriate to reconsider whether the 
existence of the duty is fair, just and reasonable (subject to the possibility that this court may 
be invited to depart from an established line of authority). Nor, a fortiori, can justice and 
reasonableness constitute a basis for discarding established principles and deciding each 
case according to what the court may regard as its broader merits. Such an approach would 
be a recipe for inconsistency and uncertainty. (at [26])
On this basis, one of the principles of negligence law, clearly established through the case law, is that 
we all owe each other duties of care not to cause one another foreseeable physical harm through our 
positive acts. This was the position that the defendant police officers found themselves in: it was 
reasonably foreseeable that, if they did not take reasonable care, in conducting their arrest, others in 
p. 70
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 17 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
the vicinity might end up being physically harmed. Accordingly, it was, the court concluded, clear as a 
matter of precedent that they owed a duty of care and it was wrong for the Court of Appeal to ask 
whether it would be fair, just and reasonable to impose such a duty.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-3-2>.
3.3  Where does this leave us? (Or when to use Caparo)
Without doubt, there are times when establishing a duty of care in negligence can be hard to do. As Lord Reed 
has pointed out, for years judges—even at the very highest level of our courts—have been doing it wrong.
↵
First it is important to remember that ultimately it is only a small minority of cases—where the courts 
are asked to determine whether new categories of claim should be recognised or existing precedents should 
be revised or extended—which call for the application of a general test or approach such as those propounded 
in Donoghue, Anns and Caparo. As such, the practical need for some such test is not great and the number of 
cases in which the courts must struggle through without the guidance of such a test are few.
However, in such cases we at least now have some clarity. When determining if a duty of care is owed, the 
first place to look is to the decided cases. If they establish that a duty of care is, or is not, owed, then we have 
our answer, and the question of whether recognising such a duty would be fair, just and reasonable does not 
need to be asked and answered again. Even where the precedents provide no conclusive answer as to whether 
a duty of care is owed, they may nonetheless provide more concrete guidance than we get from Caparo. So, for 
example, if the claimant suffers pure psychiatric injury, the courts will look to cases such as Alcock v Chief 
Constable of South Yorkshire Police [1992], Page v Smith [1996] and Paul v Royal Wolverhampton NHS Trust; 
Polmear v Royal Cornwall Hospital NHS Trust; Purchase v Ahmed [2024], rather than Caparo, to answer the 
duty of care question. Similarly, in cases concerning pure economic loss, the courts have developed more 
concrete principles to help establish when duties of care are owed. Furthermore, as Robinson shows, where 
personal injuries, and possibly property damage, are concerned, it will generally be the case that 
foreseeability of such injury will suffice to establish a duty; in other words, the test set down in Donoghue will 
be used (although there are exceptions to this—see e.g. Marc Rich & Co v Bishop Rock Marine Co Ltd [1996]).
Only where and to the extent that the precedents do not provide an answer does the court need to consider 
the fairness and reasonableness of recognising a duty of care. In doing this—and this is the key idea of the 
incremental approach outlined in Caparo and endorsed in Robinson—the court must still focus on the decided 
cases to ensure that the law develops coherently and consistently. In so doing, while the approach put 
p. 71
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 18 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
forward in Caparo does not itself determine when duties of care are owed in novel cases—this is something 
the judges faced with such cases must decide for themselves—what it does do is provide a general steer when 
judges are making these decisions; a steer broadly as outlined in Decision Tree 3.1 at the end of this chapter.
Watch our video ‘Pursuing a will-o’-the wisp: Hinkypunks, Pokémon and Caparo’ where we explore the 
ongoing importance of Caparo on how courts establish a duty of care.
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 3: Pursuing a will-o’-the wisp: Hinkypunks, Pokémon and Caparo
That said, while, as the Supreme Court stressed in Robinson, it is only in novel duty situations that courts 
must adopt the incremental approach endorsed in Caparo (in established duty situations, by contrast, the 
existence of a duty of care is already settled by statute or by precedent), it is not always easy to determine 
whether a case falls within an established duty situation or is indeed novel. Take, for example, Darnley v 
Croydon Health Services NHS Trust [2018]. The claimant went to hospital with a serious head injury and was 
incorrectly told by a receptionist that he would have to wait four to five hours for treatment. Rather than wait 
for treatment, he returned home where his condition deteriorated. By the time he returned to hospital, it was 
too late to save him from permanent brain damage. In the Court of Appeal, the case was seen as raising a 
novel duty question: do hospital receptionists owe a duty of care to patients concerning waiting times. The 
court concluded, by majority, that it would not be fair, just and reasonable for them to do so. On appeal, 
however, the Supreme Court considered that this was not a novel duty case at all. In Lord Lloyd-Jones’s view:
To my mind, … the present case falls squarely within an established category of duty of care. It has 
long been established that such a duty is owed by those who provide and run a casualty 
↵
department to persons presenting themselves complaining of illness or injury and before they 
are treated or received into care in the hospital’s wards. The duty is one to take reasonable care not 
to cause physical injury to the patient … In the present case, as soon as the claimant had attended at 
the defendant’s A & E department seeking medical attention for the injury he had sustained, had 
provided the information requested by the receptionist and had been ‘booked in’, he was accepted 
into the system and entered into a relationship with the defendant of patient and health care 
provider. The damage complained of is physical injury and not economic loss. This is a distinct and 
recognisable situation in which the law imposes a duty of care. Moreover, the scope of the duty to 
take reasonable care not to act in such a way as foreseeably to cause such a patient to sustain 
physical injury clearly extends to a duty to take reasonable care not to provide misleading 
information which may foreseeably cause physical injury. While it is correct that no authority has 
been cited in these proceedings which deals specifically with misleading information provided by a 
receptionist in an A & E department causing physical injury, it is not necessary to address, in every 
instance where the precise factual situation has not previously been the subject of a reported judicial 
decision, whether it would be fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care. It is sufficient that 
the case falls within an established category in which the law imposes a duty of care. (at [16])
p. 72
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 19 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
You may find it helpful to look at this annotated version of Darnley <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-annotated-judgment-darnley>.
If even the judges can’t agree, it is little wonder that the incremental approach and by analogy approach have 
been dismissed by some academics as ‘thoroughly banal’:
The law on duty of care develops by analogy with decided cases. Of course it does: in the same way as 
the rest of the common law. The observation seems thoroughly banal. Yet the courts think it 
meaningful … In Lord Reed’s view [in Robinson] Caparo’s ‘whole point’ was to re-establish ‘an 
approach based, in the manner characteristic of the common law, on precedent’.19
Let’s take Donoghue v Stevenson as an example. What is the duty situation that case established? The case 
itself concerned a manufacturer of ginger beer in the Scottish city of Paisley. However, no one would say that 
the duty category it supports applies only to bottles of ginger beer or is limited only to those producing drinks 
in Paisley. The same rule would apply if the court was then faced with a claim by someone who had found a 
slug in a bottle of lemonade in Glasgow. But how do we know this? One way is by looking at the judgments 
given in the case. That it was ginger beer—rather than, say, lemonade—and that the bottle was produced in 
Paisley—rather than, say, Glasgow—were not considerations which had any bearing on the decision and find 
no expression in the reasoning of the court. These, however, are easy examples. Does the Donoghue category 
extend beyond ginger beer and other drinks to food? Almost certainly. What about other potentially 
dangerous items? What about activities other than the provision of dangerous products? Does it extend, say, 
to dangerous advice? While none of these questions was addressed directly in Donoghue, we might 
nonetheless say that they were by implication. Indeed, this was the key thrust of the neighbourhood 
principle: whenever you are doing something which poses a reasonably foreseeable risk of harm, whatever 
that activity is, you must take reasonable care.
↵
Of course, this is precisely why the courts have rowed back on the neighbourhood principle: it goes too 
far. Nonetheless something like this process of generalisation—from the facts and decision in any given case 
to the broader rule or principle it stands for—is required every time we have to work out what range of cases 
is covered by a particular precedent or line of precedents. This then shows that, while the courts may say that 
they have ‘abandoned the search for a general principle capable of providing a practical test applicable in 
every situation to determine whether a duty of care is owed’ (Darnley at [15]), even the incremental approach 
depends on drawing generalisations from individual cases, indeed the sort of generalisation which Donoghue 
endorsed. Moreover, it also suggests why lower courts—told that there is no general principle to be found but 
also to look out for ‘established’ (and general) duty categories—might find their task rather difficult.
Pause for reflection
Is this really the best we can do? What should we be looking for in a test, or broader approach, for 
establishing duties of care? Why, it might be asked, do we need the duty of care at all? Is the criticism 
of some of these cases directed to the content of the actual decisions or simply to the language that 
19
p. 73
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 20 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
the courts have been using to explain their decisions? These are some of the questions you should be 
thinking about as you read the chapters that follow (which discuss situations where the law either 
denies a duty of care outright or makes establishing such a duty more onerous) and as you begin to 
learn more about duty and the tort of negligence as a whole.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-3-3>.
3.4  Conclusion
In this chapter, we have looked at the concept of duty in negligence claims. We have considered attempts by 
the courts to establish general ‘tests’ through which to establish when a duty of care is owed. We concluded 
by noting that, though we should not downplay the significance of these general tests, they are used in a 
small minority of cases where the judges are being asked to develop a new area of the law. Thus, over the 
course of the next four chapters we shall consider the circumstances in which the courts have developed 
specific rules in order to establish when a duty of care is owed.
Decision Tree 3.1 sets out the basic considerations for establishing a duty of care in new cases.
Explore this process using the interactive version of this decision tree <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-3-interactive-decision-tree-3-1>.
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 21 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
Decision Tree 3.1 Establishing a duty of care in new cases
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
What purpose does the concept of duty of care serve? Why shouldn’t everyone who falls below the standard of 
care of the reasonable person be liable if they injure someone?
p. 74
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 22 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
2
3
(i)
(ii)
4
In what situations is the issue of whether or not there is a duty of care unproblematic and when is it 
problematic? Why is this?
In each of the following situations consider both whether there is a legal duty of care and whether there should 
be:
Ethel, an elderly woman, lives alone in an isolated farmhouse. Recently there have been a number of 
burglaries in the neighbourhood so she decides to protect herself by digging a hole beneath her front 
window, which she then covers with leaves. Unfortunately, Ahoeitu, a postman, falls down this hole 
while looking through the window to see if Ethel is in to collect a parcel.
↵
 Ms Majick is a well-known magician. One night while performing their signature trick, which involves 
‘cutting’ their assistant, Dominik, in half, they accidentally slice into his side causing him to bleed heavily. On 
seeing this, Dominik’s new boyfriend, Sandro, who is in the audience, faints and falls and hits his head—he 
suffers severe concussion.
‘[T]he postulate of a simple duty to avoid any harm, that is, with hindsight, reasonably capable of being 
foreseen becomes untenable without the imposition of some intelligible limits to keep the law of negligence 
within the bounds of common sense and practicability’ (Lord Oliver, Caparo at 633). How have the courts 
sought to place limits upon the duty of care owed in negligence and to what extent do you consider that such 
limits are ‘intelligible’?
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-3-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Further reading
Much of the writing in this area focuses on the role of duty as an ingredient in the tort of negligence and asks the ‘big 
questions’ such as: ‘Do duties of care exist?’ ‘If so, how many are there?’ ‘Do we need the concept of a duty of care?’ 
and so on. The best place to start is with Nicholas McBride’s discussion of the ‘idealist’ and ‘cynical’ views of 
negligence and Jonathan Morgan’s excellent discussion of the key debates when ‘Defining the Duty of Care’ in his 
Great Debates in Tort Law.
Cane, Peter and James Goudkamp Atiyah’s Accidents, Compensation and the Law (9th edn CUP 2018) ch 3
Hepple, Bob ‘Negligence: The Search for Coherence’ (1997) 50 Current Legal Problems 69
Howarth, David ‘Many Duties of Care—Or A Duty of Care? Notes from the Underground’ (2006) 26 Oxford Journal of 
Legal Studies 449
McBride, Nicholas ‘Duties of Care—Do They Really Exist?’ (2004) 24 Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 417
Morgan, Jonathan Great Debates in Tort Law (Hart 2022) chs 6 and 7
p. 75
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 23 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Morgan, Jonathan ‘The Outer Limits of “Personal Injury”’ [2018] Cambridge Law Journal 461 (on Dryden)
Steele, Jenny ‘Duty of Care and Ethic of Care: Irreconcilable Difference?’ in Janice Richardson and Erika Rackley (eds) 
Feminist Perspectives on Tort Law (Routledge 2012) 14–35
Tofaris, Stelios, ‘Duty of Care in Negligence: A Return to Orthodoxy?’ [2018] Cambridge Law Journal 454 (on Robinson)
Witting, Christian ‘Duty of Care: An Analytical Approach’ (2005) 25 Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 33
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-3-web-links?options=showName>.
Notes
 
1. See Chapter 8.
 
2. Peter Cane and James Goudkamp Atiyah’s Accidents, Compensation and the Law (9th edn CUP 2018) 60.
 
3. See further Nicky Priaulx ‘Endgame: On Negligence and Reparation for Harm’ in Janice Richardson and Erika Rackley 
(eds) Feminist Perspectives on Tort Law (Routledge 2012) 36–54.
 
4. See e.g. in relation to economic losses and freedom of speech, Robert Stevens Torts and Rights (OUP 2007) 21 and 
also section 2.1.
 
5. This is not to say that an examiner is not under a duty of care to mark papers fairly or accurately—i.e. to give better 
papers better marks. It is also probably the case that teachers owe a duty of care to teach students adequately so as to 
enable them to pass the exam in the first place (Siddiqui v University of Oxford [2018]). The point is rather that when an 
examiner gives a bad paper a bad mark, they are, consciously, leaving that student worse off than if they had awarded 
a higher mark. Nonetheless, as long as the mark is fair, no liability will attach since there is no duty to avoid causing 
such harm.
 
6. Cane and Goudkamp n2 60–1. See also Donal Nolan ‘Deconstructing the Duty of Care’ (2013) 129 Law Quarterly 
Review 559.
 
7. Nicholas McBride ‘Duties of Care—Do They Really Exist?’ (2004) 24 Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 417, 418–19.
 
8. Joanne Conaghan and Wade Mansell The Wrongs of Tort (2nd edn Pluto Press) 13.
 
9. See further David Howarth ‘Many Duties of Care—Or A Duty of Care? Notes from the Underground’ (2006) 26 Oxford 
Journal of Legal Studies 449, 457–63.
 
10. See section 7.4.
 
11. Conaghan and Mansell n8 17, 20. See also Cane and Goudkamp n2 ch 8.
 
12. The facts of Caparo, which concerned economic loss following reliance on information provided by auditors, are 
discussed in detail in Chapter 7. They are not relevant here.
 
13. Alistair Mullis and Ken Oliphant Tort (4th edn Palgrave Macmillan 2011) 22.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
3. Duty of care: Basic principles
Page 24 of 24
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
14. See e.g. the so-called Alcock control mechanisms which limit duty of care in relation to psychiatric injuries suffered 
by ‘secondary victims’ discussed in section 5.6.
 
15. Christian Witting ‘Duty of Care: An Analytical Approach’ (2005) 25 Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 33, 62.
 
16. Jonathan Morgan Great Debates in Tort Law (Hart 2022) 155.
 
17. See section 2.2.
 
18. For an example of this approach in action, see James-Bown and others v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis 
[2018].
 
19. Morgan n16 177, 181.
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
