12. Product liability
Page 1 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
12. Product liability
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0012
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter discusses the ways in which liability for defective products is regulated in tort law and which is primarily 
regulated by statute. The chapter considers manufacturers’ liability in negligence and the problems claimants may encounter 
when trying to sue. This leads to a later development relating to product liability—the Consumer Protection Act (CPA) 1987— 
enacted to ensure better protection of consumers from defective goods by making producers strictly liable for harms caused 
by the products they market. However, a claimant may still claim in negligence due to the statutory limitations in relation to 
certain types of claim.
Keywords: 
Keywords, tort law, defective product, manufacturers’ liability, negligence, Consumer Protection Act, defect, 
state of the art defence
Problem question
Read this problem question carefully and keep it in mind while you are working through the 
chapter that follows. At the end of the chapter you will be able to apply what you have learnt to the 
problem question and advise the relevant parties.
After many years of research, Rack and Horse Pharmaceuticals (RHP) developed a drug to treat breast 
cancer. After only 18 months of clinical trials, it received a licence and went on the market in the UK in 
March 2020. Although the drug itself is completely pure, it is now known that in less than 0.5 per cent 
of patients (those who carry a particular gene) it can produce an undesirable side effect known as Tort 
Syndrome. This side effect is not widely publicised as both RHP and the government are keen to 
encourage widespread uptake of the drug in relevant groups of women.
p. 349
12. Product liability
Page 2 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
→
→
→
In 2025, 20 claimants who were given the drug between 2020 and 2022 and who contracted Tort 
Syndrome begin an action against RHP alleging both negligence and liability under the Consumer 
Protection Act 1987. RHP argues against liability because up until 2023, there was no genetic test that 
could determine which individuals carried the gene in question.
The claimants bring evidence to show there was an article in an Outer Mongolian scientific journal, 
published both in hard copy and on the internet in 2021, which suggested a test to determine whether 
individual women carried the specific gene for the reaction to the drug that causes Tort Syndrome. 
Had RHP conducted clinical trials for longer, the company would have been able to identify the 
characteristics of the women likely to react badly to the drug and to issue appropriate warnings and 
advice.
Advise the parties.
12.1  Introduction
Consider the following examples:
Stuart buys Bluetooth headphones from an electrical store. He later finds out that they do not work 
because a small but crucial component is missing.
Kristian buys Bluetooth headphones from an electrical store. He later tries to charge them but the 
internal wiring is faulty; he receives a small electric shock.
Theresa receives Bluetooth headphones for her birthday. She later finds out that they do not work 
because a small but crucial component is missing.
Amarpreet buys a car for Marianne. Two weeks later, one of the tyres explodes while Marianne is 
driving, causing the car to swerve into her garden wall, which will cost £500 to rebuild. The car costs 
£1,000 to repair.
Rosie buys a car for Molly. After a year, the two front tyres need replacing. Two weeks later, one of the 
replaced tyres explodes while Molly is driving, causing the car to swerve into her garden wall, which will 
cost £500 to rebuild. The car costs £1,000 to repair.
Tyler takes a drug to stop his head aching, but later finds out that he has a stomach ulcer caused by an 
unusual reaction to the drug.
p. 350
12. Product liability
Page 3 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
At first sight, it might seem odd that we are considering product liability in a book on tort law, when most of 
us are more accustomed on a day-to-day basis to dealing with ‘products’ and the consequences of their 
defects via contract law. However, Donoghue v Stevenson [1932], the foundational case for all modern claims 
in negligence, is itself a case about a defective product (contaminated ginger beer) that harmed the end-user 
(gastroenteritis).
Liability for defective products is, therefore, also possible in negligence, though the picture is, as we shall see, 
more complicated than might be expected. Much depends on what type of defect is being claimed for. It is 
more appropriate to sue in contract for some harms caused by defects in products and in negligence for 
others. In basic terms, this depends on whether the claimant takes their case against the retailer (contract) or 
the manufacturer (negligence) of the item. Often, a claim in contract might be preferable where possible, as 
‘strict liability’ (i.e. liability without the need to establish fault) is imposed by statute on retailers in respect of 
the quality of the goods that they sell, and the remedies are set out. When claiming in negligence against a 
manufacturer, the usual hurdles of duty, breach and—in particular—causation must be overcome.
Because an understanding of liability for defective products in contract law is an important part of the overall 
picture regarding defective products in law, it is worth either refreshing your memory about these liabilities, 
or gaining a brief overview of them, if you have yet to study contract law, before reading on. To help you, we 
have included a basic summary of the liabilities that may arise in contract on our online resources.
This chapter looks at tortious liabilities for defective products, beginning with manufacturers’ liability in 
negligence and the problems claimants may encounter. This leads us to a later development relating to 
product liability—the Consumer Protection Act (CPA) 1987—enacted to ensure better protection of 
consumers from defective goods by making producers strictly liable for harms caused by the products they 
market.
12.2  Defective products—Claims in negligence
As already mentioned, at its narrowest interpretation, Donoghue is a landmark product liability case. The case 
not only lays the foundations of the entire tort of negligence but also specifically allows for claims in 
negligence to be taken directly against the manufacturers of defective products.1
Before Donoghue, a person injured (either personally or through damage to their property) by defective goods 
had limited grounds for recovery. If they had a contract with the retailer of the goods then they may have had 
a claim for breach of contract and (subject to the various rules governing this type of claim) compensation 
could be awarded for both the cost of replacing the product itself and of putting right any damage to person or 
property caused by the product. Contract law, however, is limited in the protection it can offer—not least only 
(usually) to those who are party to the contract, which Mrs Donoghue was not. Further, in the tort of 
negligence, though someone in Mrs Donoghue’s position could be compensated for their illness and distress, 
the cost of the product itself is regarded as pure economic loss and, as such, unrecoverable.2 The claimant 
could only have received compensation (in contract) covering the cost of the ginger beer itself if she had paid 
for it. If, as was the case in Donoghue, she had no contract with the seller, she would be limited to a claim in 
negligence against the manufacturer.
p. 351
1
2
12. Product liability
Page 4 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Before 1932, manufacturers could only be liable in relation to products if the product was classed as 
‘dangerous’ or was manufactured to be dangerous, in which case a warning had to be given. However, the 
distinction between ‘dangerous’ and ‘not-dangerous’ was not always helpful.3 In Donoghue, the House of 
Lords overturned the distinction and also discarded what it termed the ‘privity of contract fallacy’, holding 
that there should be no reason why the same facts should not give one person a right in contract and another 
person a simultaneous right to sue in negligence. It drew no distinction between the type or nature of the 
product (though it seems logical that this would be a relevant factor when assessing the standard of care to 
which the manufacturer should be held and whether that has been breached). That is, it seems common 
sense to say that manufacturers of inherently dangerous products ought to be even more careful.4
Pause for reflection
The law lords in Donoghue were split 3:2 in favour of the claimant. Two dissented, mainly because of 
concerns about opening the ‘floodgates’ to claims (similar reasoning is often seen in modern 
negligence cases, where a court is asked to expand the types of situation or relationship in which a 
negligence claim might succeed). Within the majority opinions, Lord Macmillan took a more 
pragmatic approach to the finding of liability than Lord Atkin’s broad ‘neighbour’ principle— 
favouring a more cautious case-by-case approach (similar to that used in novel claims following 
Caparo Industries plc v Dickman [1990]).5
↵
Interestingly, three years prior to Donoghue a case with remarkably similar facts had been 
dismissed. In Mullen v AG Barr [1929], it was alleged that a bottle of ginger beer contained a 
decomposing mouse but, as there was no precedent for the type of claim being made (ginger beer not 
being ‘dangerous’ in and of itself), the case failed. The same lawyers represented Mrs Donoghue—and 
were clearly very persistent—so it is them we should thank for the law as it stands today!
Generally, the wide scope of the tort of negligence (and negligence in relation to product liability) is 
these days taken for granted and the impact and importance of the Donoghue decision is not really 
seen amongst all the later developments, limitations and rules. Consider how negligence might look if 
the claimant in Donoghue had failed or if Lord Macmillan’s approach had been favoured over Lord 
Atkin’s.
12.2.1  The scope of liability under Donoghue
As Donoghue is a negligence case, liability in relation to harm caused by products must be assessed by 
considering the various factors—duty, breach and causation—that a claimant must establish when making 
any claim in the tort of negligence. As these have all been discussed in far greater detail in Chapters 2 to 10, 
we concentrate here only on the more pertinent issues regarding product liability.
3
4
5
p. 352
12. Product liability
Page 5 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
12.2.1.1  Duty of care
The duty owed is the ordinary common law duty of care—based on the presumed intention to supply the 
goods to the ultimate consumer in the same state they left the production line. The duty extends beyond the 
manufacturer/consumer relationship to include, for example, packers, machine operators and distributors. 
Similarly, the ‘ultimate consumer’ not only covers the ‘end-purchaser’ of the product concerned but includes 
also the ultimate user (as in Donoghue) and any person coming into contact with the product. In Stennett v 
Hancock & Peters [1939], for example, the manufacturer’s duty of care extended to a pedestrian who was hit by 
a wheel of a lorry when it fell off.
The duty may also extend beyond the product itself to include, for example, containers, packaging or 
instructions (Watson v Buckley, Osborne, Garrett & Co Ltd [1940]). In Donoghue, Lord Atkin defined the type of 
products that the duty covers as ‘articles of common household use, where everyone, including the 
manufacturer, knows the articles will be used by persons other than the ultimate purchaser’ (at 46). Clearly, 
however, given the example of Stennett, mentioned earlier, the definition of ‘products’ must extend beyond 
‘household items’ and could, logically, include any product where the definition of ‘consumer’ is taken in its 
broadest sense.
Despite the range of relationships covered and a broad understanding of what a product is, it should be noted 
that the principles preventing a duty of care from arising in the wider law of negligence also apply here. 
Damage to (or a defect in) the product itself, for which the only claim is the cost of replacement, is regarded 
as pure economic loss, for which no duty can arise (Murphy v Brentwood District Council [1991]).6 A claimant 
can therefore recover 
↵
damages for anything the defective product causes injury to, but not for any 
injury to the product itself. The remedy in tort would seem, in this respect, to be less useful than that in 
contract.
Pause for reflection
Is there a good reason for regarding the cost of replacing the item itself as pure economic loss, thereby 
preventing a remedy in tort? Does it seem fair that if you bought the item for yourself, you would be 
able to claim this cost against the retailer (in contract), but if you were given the product as a gift, you 
could not obtain a replacement? While it might be thought that the person who bought the present 
could always bring a claim on your behalf (e.g. the position of Amarpreet in the examples at the 
beginning of this chapter), in reality they cannot as they will have suffered no harm.
Before we leave ‘duty’ some mention should be made of what is known as the ‘complex structure’ theory.7 
Under this theory, component parts of a product are (sometimes) seen as a separate product entirely.8 
Therefore, if the component part is the defective ‘product’, and it causes damage to the rest of the product or 
another part of it, this can be classed as consequential damage and not pure economic loss (though the cost of 
the defective component itself would be pure economic loss).9 Consider how this relates to the Amarpreet/ 
Marianne and Rosie/Molly situations outlined at the beginning of the chapter. If the tyre exploded soon after 
6
p. 353
7 
8 
9
12. Product liability
Page 6 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
the car was purchased, then it is likely that the courts would view this as a defective car and Marianne would 
have no claim (she did not buy the car herself so cannot claim against the retailer) for the cost of fixing the 
car, although she would be able to claim for the cost of rebuilding her wall. However, if Molly’s replacement 
tyre exploded, this could be considered to be one component of a ‘complex structure’ (the car) and 
subsequently any damage to the car, as well as the wall, would be consequential loss.10 All that Molly would be 
unable to claim would be the cost of replacing the tyre.
Pause for reflection
Should a manufacturer’s duty extend to taking steps to recall defective products that have already 
gone into circulation?
In the US case Grimshaw v Ford Motor Co [1981], Ford was alleged to have discovered a defect in the 
Ford Pinto which sometimes caused the cars to explode if they were hit by another car from behind. 
However, the company calculated that it would be cheaper to pay compensation to anyone injured or 
killed in such an explosion than it would be to recall all the cars in circulation and repair the defects. If 
there had been a duty to recall the cars once the defect was 
↵
known then Ford would have been in 
breach for not doing so. At trial, Ford was ordered to pay punitive damages in excess of $125 million, 
though this was reduced to $3.5 million on appeal (plus compensatory damages of just under $3 
million).11 This case illustrates many of the problems associated with using private law remedies in 
relation to product liability. The fact that producers can be sued is meant to have a deterrent effect, 
thus changing their behaviour. Yet, it seems, sometimes producers (particularly large-scale 
producers) will weigh the risks and benefits to their profits and shareholders when considering 
whether to recall and rectify defects in their products (even where these are dangerous enough to 
pose a risk to life, as in the Ford case). In this sense, it seems that stronger public law regulation might 
be a better deterrent.12
12.2.1.2  Breach and causation
Breach of duty of care was considered in Chapter 8. The question here is: did the defendant manufacturer 
exercise reasonable care when making the product? This is, as ever, to be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
Breach is not normally problematic as it may often be inferred from the presence of the defect. That is, it is 
often assumed that any defect can only exist because there was negligence during the manufacturing process 
—how else could a snail come to be in a sealed bottle of ginger beer, for example? The manufacturer must 
rebut the presumption of carelessness with evidence. This principle can clearly be seen in Grant v Australian 
Knitting Mills Ltd [1936].
10
p. 354
11
12
12. Product liability
Page 7 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Grant v Australian Knitting Mills Ltd [1936] AC 85 (PC)
Mr Grant purchased some woollen underpants and, after wearing them, suffered from a painful skin 
condition. This was caused by a reaction to sulphites present in the wool, left over from the 
manufacturing process. The claimant could not prove negligence on the part of the manufacturer and 
the manufacturer claimed that there had been no carelessness during the manufacturing process, and 
that reasonable care had been taken to ensure that chemicals used did not remain in the wool.
The court found that there could be no other explanation for the sulphites in the wool than that one of 
the employees had, at some point during the manufacture of the underpants, been careless. The 
manufacturers were therefore held liable.
Defects in products that are present when the product reaches the end-user can be inferred to have been 
caused by the manufacturer’s carelessness, unless the manufacturer did not intend the product to reach the 
end-user in the same condition it left the factory. Following Grant, it is relatively easy to establish a breach of 
duty, as courts are willing to infer carelessness without evidence to the contrary. This inference is not always 
made, however. In Evans v Triplex Glass Co Ltd [1936], for example, a claim against the manufacturer of 
windscreen 
↵
safety glass did not succeed as the court found that the fault was more likely to lie with the 
fitters of the glass than its manufacturer.
Once breach is established, it must be decided whether the breach actually caused the harm complained of. 
The tests for causation in fact and in law are the same in product liability as for any other area of negligence.13 
In a sense, however, the duty requirement that the item must not have been subject to intermediate 
examination between leaving the manufacturer and reaching the end-user can also be viewed as a breach/ 
causation question. To find the defendant liable, a court must satisfy itself that they were responsible for the 
defect and that it was not due to the fault of someone else further down the chain of supply. If someone else— 
for example, a distribution company who inspected the goods before they were supplied to retailers—could 
be said to be responsible for the defect, this will ‘break the chain’ of causation back to the manufacturer. In 
addition, an end-user of a product will be unsuccessful in a claim if it can be shown that they had knowledge 
(actual or constructive) of the defects.14
In Grant, the defendants argued that the goods may have been tampered with after leaving the factory and the 
fact that this might have happened (there was no real way of proving whether it had) should enable the 
manufacturer to escape liability. They argued that because the garments had been wrapped in paper packets 
and could be sold separately, there was a possibility that they had been interfered with. The court dismissed 
this argument, finding that interference was a question of fact (i.e. evidence must be shown to prove that 
there was actually interference, otherwise the presumption will be that there was none). However, Evans 
(decided in the same year) tells us that if there is a ‘reasonable possibility’ or probability of interference with 
the product, this will be enough to exonerate the manufacturer from liability.
p. 355
13 
14
12. Product liability
Page 8 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The question of inspection may be a difficult one, especially if a party in the supply chain had the opportunity 
to inspect the goods but did not take it. There is no obligation on intermediate parties (or, indeed, the end 
consumer) to exhaustively examine goods that pass through their control, so a manufacturer will remain 
liable unless they have a genuine or specific reason to believe that the goods will be inspected by another 
party before they leave the supply chain. This, of course, prompts another question: when can a manufacturer 
reasonably expect another party to examine the goods? While in Andrews v Hopkinson [1957] a second-hand 
car salesman had the opportunity to check cars and was held liable for failing to do so for any obvious faults 
(although a full and exhaustive inspection was not required), in Hurley v Dyke [1979] a seller of a defective 
second-hand car avoided liability as he had informed the buyer that it was ‘as seen and with all its faults’ (the 
warning moved the duty onto the buyer to inspect the car for himself).
12.2.2  The limits of negligence liability
So far we have considered the position under Donoghue in relation to manufacturing defects. However, 
products can be also defective because of the way they are designed and in these circumstances we begin to 
see the limits of a claim in negligence. This is problematic. Design defects by their very nature are likely to 
affect greater numbers of end-users—possibly even every consumer of a product—and are also likely to be 
difficult to discover by examination of the product either before it leaves the supply chain or by the ultimate 
consumer. In short, design defects are more serious and increase the possibility of harm to the product’s end- 
users.
↵
Unfortunately, it is also more difficult for someone to succeed in a negligence claim in relation to design 
defects. While duty is easy to establish, it is difficult to show that there was carelessness in designing a 
product, that is, that the designers fell below—or breached—the standard of care expected of them. In 
relation to causation, the claimant must show two things: first, that the design defect can cause harm and, 
secondly, that the design defect was the actual or material cause of the specific harm being claimed for. This 
is a high threshold. For example, a claimant may be able to show that a particular drug, because of a design 
flaw, can cause cancer. However, it will be very difficult for them to prove, on the balance of probabilities, that 
taking the drug caused their particular cancer, particularly as other factors such as environment, genetics and 
lifestyle may also all be relevant (as in Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1988]).15
The particular difficulties associated with design defects became very apparent in the 1960s with the 
Thalidomide tragedy.
The Thalidomide tragedy
Thalidomide is a drug that was initially sold from the mid-1950s to 1961 in many countries worldwide 
and under many different product names. It was primarily prescribed to pregnant women, to help 
combat morning sickness and to help them sleep. However, it later transpired that Thalidomide is a 
potent teratogen, which means that it can cause severe birth defects if taken during pregnancy. The 
p. 356
15
12. Product liability
Page 9 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
drug had been inadequately tested before being put on the market and approximately 10,000 children 
were born with birth defects after their mothers took it while pregnant. These defects included 
phocomelia, characterised by the shortness of the long bones in the arms or legs and therefore often 
severely shortened limbs, as well as problems with the heart or kidneys, or with digestion. Life 
expectancy was also shortened and many affected children died in infancy.
In 1962, in reaction to the tragedy, the US Congress enacted laws requiring tests for safety during 
pregnancy before any drug can receive approval for sale in the United States and numerous other 
countries enacted similar legislation. Thalidomide was not prescribed or sold for decades.16 However, 
perhaps surprisingly, it was never withdrawn completely from the medical marketplace and is used 
today to treat a number of conditions, including leprosy and several cancers.
The Thalidomide tragedy is a perfect example of harm caused by a design defect. Nothing in the 
manufacturing process had gone wrong, causing a particular batch of the drug to produce negative 
side effects in those for whom it had been prescribed. Instead, part of the design process had been 
faulty. The parents of some of the children affected by Thalidomide claimed in negligence against the 
producers of the drug. The legal outcomes of their claims are forever unknown as they were settled 
before reaching court, however it is clear that although the manufacturers owed those affected a duty 
of care as the ultimate consumers, because the consequences of the drug were not foreseeable by a 
reasonable manufacturer at the time it was circulated, it would have been very difficult for them to 
show that the manufacturer had breached this duty by 
↵
failing to take reasonable care in the 
design process. It would have also been difficult to establish causation—the birth defects could have 
been caused by a number of different things.17
What the Thalidomide tragedy did highlight was the need for change. While the common law was in a 
fairly satisfactory position in relation to manufacturing defects, as courts were willing to infer 
negligence (Grant) and generally had a fairly ‘flexible’ approach to liability, the Thalidomide cases 
showed what problems claimants might face if trying to claim for harms caused by design defects. 
This led to demands for legal reform and, in particular (perhaps because it was ‘fashionable’ at the 
time), a call for ‘strict liability’ to be placed on manufacturers of defective products.
Strict liability is liability without fault. What it would mean for manufacturers to be strictly liable for 
defective products is that even if they did nothing wrong in the manufacturing or design process (i.e. 
there was nothing that could technically be called a ‘breach’), they would have to compensate 
someone who suffered harm caused by a defect in their product. The main reasons suggested for 
introducing strict liability were threefold:
manufacturers create products and therefore create the hazard or harm. Since this is done in 
the pursuit of profit, it is reasonable for manufacturers to accept the risk of liability for any 
harms caused by the product;
16
p. 357
17
12. Product liability
Page 10 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(3)
manufacturers are in the best position to insure against the risks of any such hazards or 
harms (and the price of such insurance can be reflected in the product price and therefore 
distributed amongst all end-users of a product);
imposing strict liability on manufacturers provides an incentive for them to take all possible 
safety precautions during the design and manufacturing processes.
In light of increasing pressure worldwide in favour of strict liability, the European Community issued 
a Directive in 198518 requiring member states to change and harmonise their laws on product 
liability.19 In the UK, this took the form of Part 1 of the CPA.20
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-12-2>.
12.3  Defective products—Claims under Part 1 of the Consumer Protec­
tion Act 1987
Section 1(1) of the CPA stipulates that:
This Part [was enacted] for the purpose of making such provision as [was] necessary in order to 
comply with the product liability Directive and shall be construed accordingly.
Thus, it may be that it is the terms of the Directive itself that should be followed, rather than the terms of the 
Act, as the CPA must be construed in line with the original meaning intended by the Directive—a point to 
which we shall later return.
The CPA makes the manufacturer of a product (and others along the supply chain) liable without proof of fault 
(strictly liable) for personal injury and some property damage caused wholly or in part by a defect in the 
product concerned. This looks to be a step forward from, and a contrast to, the tort of negligence, where fault 
must be proved. As formulated, strict liability as (supposedly) provided by the CPA ought to provide an easier 
route to redress.
Manufacturers are, however, granted a number of specific defences under the CPA. These are problematic. 
The imposition of strict liability is considerably less strict if the defendant is able to defend claims brought 
against them. One of the defences in particular has caused considerable controversy, as we shall see later.
Essentially, establishing liability under the CPA requires a series of questions to be asked. The Act defines 
concepts such as ‘product’ and ‘defect’ and it is within these confines that claims must proceed.
18
19
20
p. 358
12. Product liability
Page 11 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
12.3.1  Bringing a claim
Unfortunately, the CPA does not clearly set out who can sue and who can be sued.21 Reading between the 
lines, it appears that anyone who suffers damage covered by the Act as a result of a defective product can 
claim (ss 2(1) and 5(1)). The definitions in section 1(2) and a further outlining of who potential defendants 
might be in section 2(2)(a)–(c) suggest that manufacturers and producers of goods can be sued, as well as 
‘own-branders’ (companies who put their name to a product made for them by someone else)22 and 
importers. Similarly, suppliers of goods can be sued if the conditions in section 2(3) are met. The purpose of 
the Act is to increase the protection of consumers (in the spirit intended by those advocating strict liability 
for defective products) by ensuring that someone can be found liable in relation to defective products. This is 
underlined by section 2(5) which states that if more than one potential defendant can be liable for the same 
damage they will be jointly and severally liable.
To claim, the right ‘kind’ of damage is needed. This is defined in section 5 as death or personal injury, or 
property damage with a value of more than £275 (s 5(4)). Thus, small monetary claims for property damage 
are excluded (perhaps to limit the number and ensure the ‘seriousness’ of claims). There is no upper limit to 
the total amount of damages that may be claimed (despite an option to limit this when implementing the 
Directive). Pure economic loss is also specifically excluded by section 5(2), which means that, as in the tort of 
negligence, the cost of replacing a defective product is not recoverable.
Pause for reflection
Does a figure of £275 as the minimum claimable limit for property damage seem (a) quite arbitrary 
and (b) relatively low? Consider what you can buy for £275 these days and what could have been 
bought for that sum when the CPA came into force. Should this figure be increased?
‘Products’ are defined in section 1(2) and include ‘any goods or electricity and … a product which is comprised 
in another product, whether by virtue of being a component part or raw material or otherwise’. ‘Goods’ are 
further defined (s 45) to include ‘substances, growing crops and things comprised in land by virtue of being 
attached to it, and any ship, aircraft or vehicle’. This definition is quite broad and possibly encompasses 
things that, as a consumer, one might not ordinarily have considered.23
The key aspect of the CPA is its coverage of ‘defective’ products—so the definition of defect is one that needs 
detailed analysis. It is here that most of the case law under the CPA can be found: the courts have found 
themselves tasked, on occasion, with ruling on whether or not a certain product is ‘defective’ for the purposes 
of the Act.
21
22
p. 359
23
12. Product liability
Page 12 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
12.3.2  What is a ‘defect’?
Defects in products for the purposes of the CPA are defined in section 3. As a defendant is strictly liable for 
any damage (of the right kind) caused wholly or in part by a ‘defective product’, this definition is a key part of 
the Act. Section 3 defines a defect as follows:
[T]here is a defect in a product for the purposes of this Part if the safety of the product is not such as 
persons generally are entitled to expect …
The burden of proof is on the claimant to show that a defect exists, and that this caused them harm. In 
addition, defects are about safety, not quality. However, it seems that the standard (regarding what is and 
what is not defective) is set by ‘persons generally’—not, for example, by manufacturers, consumers or any 
other specific group or individual (see Richardson v LRC Products Ltd [2000]). But the way the definition is 
phrased does mean that, objectively, the perspectives of those groups or individuals have to be taken into 
account when considering what ‘persons generally’ might think. This is a rather weak and circular definition. 
Indeed, in Wilkes v DePuy International Ltd [2016], Hickinbottom J pointed out that as an objective, rather than 
a subjective, consumer expectation test, it is rather an ‘empty vessel’ (at [68]).
Counterpoint
If the CPA really is about consumer protection, it seems odd that the expectations of manufacturers 
and others with vested interests should be taken into account when deciding whether a product is 
‘defective’. Manufacturers base their considerations on a cost/benefit analysis—for example, to them, 
a product will be ‘defective’ only if the magnitude of the danger it poses and the cost of preventing any 
harm occurring outweigh the product’s utility—this risk/utility analysis is more familiar to us from 
the tort of negligence and in particular an assessment of the standard of care and whether a defendant 
has fallen below it. This, therefore, implies fault—and the CPA was meant to bring no-fault (strict) 
liability.
On the other hand, it is questionable whether strict liability is desirable in this area at all. 
Manufacturers have to absorb the costs and risks of development in other ways and, unless clearly 
negligent in the way they make a path to market (e.g. if a pharmaceutical company did not undertake 
any testing to determine whether a drug it was producing had any harmful side effects), it can seem 
unreasonable that they also have to pay for harms suffered by people using their products. Consumers 
generally welcome choice, innovation and competition (more products on the market, prices are kept 
down by competition, etc), so is imposing strict liability on producers allowing consumers the best of 
both worlds? Perhaps it is arguable that consumers should take more responsibility for themselves 
when it comes to injuries suffered in this context (see Abouzaid v Mothercare (UK) Ltd [2000] and 
Pollard v Tesco Stores Ltd [2006] as just two examples of cases where it might well be argued that had 
more care been taken by the consumer, the risk would not have materialised).24
p. 360
24
12. Product liability
Page 13 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Evidently, the CPA’s definition of ‘defect’ allows products into the market that are potentially dangerous—but 
not defective. As the concept of a defect is linked to ‘safety’ and about what may be reasonably expected, this 
means that certain items that are inherently dangerous cannot be classed as defective. For example, a cut- 
throat razor or a serrated bread knife will not be ‘defective’ products, as people are ‘generally entitled to 
expect’ that razors and knives will be sharp.
Pause for reflection
Where does this leave products such as cigarettes and alcohol? Are these as safe as ‘persons generally 
are entitled to expect’? If so, what makes them this ‘safe’? It could be argued that the damaging effects 
of cigarettes and alcohol are well publicised. For example, the potential consequences of smoking are 
already clearly pointed out on packaging,25 and government 
↵
campaigns have highlighted that 
people who consume alcohol should take into account how many ‘units’ they consume, with products 
now labelled to allow consumers to find this information easily. It is very unlikely that policy-makers 
would think it wise or practical to take tobacco and alcohol out of circulation (consider the 
‘Prohibition’ experiment in the United States during the 1920s and 30s, which drove the supply of 
alcohol underground and created a criminal subculture). There are cultural issues with regulating an 
existing product which has been found to be dangerous long after release, as opposed to regulating 
the safety of a new product coming onto the market. So, while it might be said that tobacco and 
alcohol are not as ‘safe’ as other products, public expectations in relation to these substances clearly 
differ greatly from those in relation to others.
The question when deciding whether a product is defective for the purposes of the CPA is: what are ‘persons 
generally entitled to expect’? As this is an objective standard it can be difficult to assess, although section 3(2) 
(a)–(c) sets out guidelines as to what factors may be taken into account when considering the safety/ 
defectiveness of a particular product, including:
the manner in which, and purposes for which, the product has been marketed;
the ‘get-up’ (packaging);
use of marks (e.g. the British Standards Institution ‘Kitemark’);
instructions or warnings accompanying the product when sold;
what might reasonably be expected to be done with the product; and
the time at which the product was supplied.
25
p. 361
12. Product liability
Page 14 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Counterpoint
The issue of defectiveness or non-defectiveness is perhaps a common-sense interpretation of the 
safety of a product, according to how and why it is marketed, how it is packaged, what people 
(consumers) are meant to do with it (and what they are not) and, importantly, any warnings 
accompanying the product. It can be assumed that an adequate warning would be enough to make an 
otherwise defective (i.e. unsafe) product non-defective. This, too, does not sound like strict liability in 
any real sense. Either a product is unsafe or it is not—should giving a warning be enough to remove 
liability? Put another way, if there is a product which would be deemed unsafe if no warning came 
with it, are we saying the manufacturer is at fault for not supplying an adequate warning, and should 
therefore be liable? Conversely, if a warning is included, is there no fault and therefore no liability? Is 
this really a form of negligence?
When considering ‘defectiveness’, the question of whether adequate warnings were given (thus rendering a 
product ‘safe’) has arisen in case law generated by the CPA (of which there is surprisingly little). For example, 
in Worsley v Tambrands Ltd [2000], a woman complained that a tampon she had used was defective when she 
suffered toxic shock syndrome after using it. She claimed that while it was known that the risk of this 
syndrome appearing was greater with misuse of the product, she had used it according to the instructions. As 
the 
↵
evidence showed that she had read the comprehensive instructions, including the warnings given 
about the product, the court held that the tampon had not been defective as ‘people generally’ (in this case, 
women using the product) should know, as it was stated in the instructions and warnings, that a small risk of 
toxic shock syndrome was present even with ordinary use. Similarly, in Richardson v LRC Products Ltd [2001], 
the question for the court was whether a condom, from which the whole tip had sheared off during use (i.e. it 
had more than just split or punctured during sex), was defective. The claimants were claiming for the costs 
associated with pregnancy and birth of an unwanted child. Again, because it was considered well known that 
condoms are not 100 per cent effective, due to the warnings to this effect that always accompany them 
(including on the outer packaging), the condom was not found to be defective.
Counterpoint
Richardson may be viewed outside the ambit of product liability as a case where a claim for ‘wrongful 
birth’ was being made. In other cases of this type (e.g. when a sterilisation operation has been 
performed negligently), the House of Lords was adamant in its view that this is not a compensable 
harm.26 While the courts are prepared to award damages for the pain and suffering associated with 
the ‘physical harm’ of pregnancy and birth caused by negligence, damages for ‘wrongful birth’ are 
generally unavailable. This is largely due to policy reasons: either the harm suffered is not viewed as a 
legal harm, or the harm (the cost of raising an unwanted child) has been deliberately classified as 
‘pure economic loss’ (see McFarlane v Tayside Health Board [1999]—discussed in section 7.5.2). Given 
p. 362
26
12. Product liability
Page 15 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
the date of Richardson, it may well be assumed that this decision also had the weight of the public 
policy arguments from the wrongful birth negligence cases behind it, even though the same harm 
was caused in a different way.
Read more about this counterpoint <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-  
student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-12-pointers-to-pause-for-reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes? 
options=showName>.
In Bogle and others v McDonald’s Restaurants Ltd [2002], customers of McDonald’s fast-food restaurants sued 
the company (in negligence as well as under the CPA) for scalding caused by hot coffee. The product (the 
coffee) was argued to be ‘defective’ in two ways: first, the temperature at which it was served was too high 
and, secondly, the lids on the cups in which it was served came off too easily. The High Court dismissed the 
claims, holding that ‘persons generally’ would know that hot coffee could cause scalding if spilt and that care 
should be taken with hot drinks to avoid spillages. Because people want hot coffee, they have to suffer the 
‘inevitable’ risk that comes with it. Field J said that:
if McDonald’s were going to avoid the risk of injury by a deep thickness burn they would have had to 
have served tea and coffee at between 55C and 60C. But tea ought to be brewed with boiling water if 
it is to give its best flavour and coffee ought to be brewed at between 85C and 95C. Further, people 
generally like to allow a hot drink to cool to the temperature they prefer. Accordingly, I have no 
doubt that tea and coffee served at between 55C and 60C would not have been acceptable to 
McDonald’s customers. Indeed, on the evidence, I find that the public want 
↵
to be able to buy tea 
and coffee served hot, that is to say at a temperature of at least 65C, even though they know (as I 
think they must be taken to do …) that there is a risk of a scalding injury if the drink is spilled. (at 
[33])
Put another way, the decision says that coffee-buying customers (who were usually adults and teenagers) 
should generally expect coffee to be hot and should guard against spillages themselves. On the second issue, 
the court found that the lids needed to come off easily to allow customers to put sugar and milk in their 
drinks; the fact they came off easily if the cups were knocked over did not make them defective. The test used 
here seems to be one of ‘legitimate consumer expectation’ and can probably be linked back to the use of the 
words ‘entitled to expect’ in section 3 of the CPA—that what persons generally are ‘entitled’ to expect may 
well be different from what an individual claimant or claimants did in fact expect (i.e. some people may have 
higher standards, but they may not be ‘entitled’ to these standards under the CPA).
p. 363
12. Product liability
Page 16 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
Bogle may be compared to the infamous US case of Liebeck v McDonald’s Restaurants [1994], which is 
often used as an example of the US ‘compensation culture’. The case became a flashpoint in the US 
debate over tort reform after a jury awarded nearly $3 million to a woman who was burned by hot 
coffee bought from McDonald’s.27 Stella Liebeck, a 79-year-old woman, bought a cup of coffee from 
the drive-through window of her local McDonald’s restaurant. She was sitting in the passenger seat 
of her grandson’s car, which he had parked to allow Mrs Liebeck to add cream and sugar to her coffee. 
She placed the coffee cup between her knees and pulled the lid towards her to remove it, spilling the 
entire cup of coffee on her lap and burning herself in the process. Her award was reduced to $640,000 
by the trial judge, though the case was later settled out of court for an unknown amount (thought to 
be less than $600,000) before an appeal was decided.
Do you think Bogle is evidence of a ‘compensation culture’ in the UK? Or do you think the claims were 
legitimate? Some often unreported information (or facts that are conveniently forgotten by those 
arguing that a compensation culture exists) about the Liebeck case is that the coffee, which had been 
absorbed by Mrs Liebeck’s clothing, was then held against her skin as 
↵
she sat in the puddle of 
hot liquid for over 90 seconds, scalding her thighs, buttocks and groin. She was taken to hospital, 
where doctors determined that she had suffered third-degree burns on 6 per cent of her skin and 
lesser burns over 16 per cent. She remained in the hospital for eight days while she underwent skin 
grafting, which was then followed by two years of further treatment. During the trial, the court heard 
that McDonald’s required its franchises to serve coffee at 180–190°F (82–88°C). At that temperature, 
it was said that the coffee could cause a third-degree burn in between two and seven seconds. Other 
evidence showed that from 1982 to 1992 the company had received more than 700 reports of people 
burned by its coffee, to varying degrees of severity, and had previously settled claims arising from 
scalding injuries for more than $500,000.
Mrs Liebeck had not intended this outcome: initially, she sought to settle with McDonald’s for 
$20,000 to cover her medical costs, which were $11,000, but the company offered only $800. When 
McDonald’s refused to raise its offer, she claimed against them, alleging ‘gross negligence’ for selling 
‘unreasonably dangerous’ and ‘defectively manufactured’ coffee. McDonald’s then refused her 
lawyer’s offer to settle for $90,000. Just before the trial, a mediator suggested a settlement of 
$225,000, but McDonald’s again refused. In part, it can be said that all the refusals by McDonald’s 
explain the high award of damages from the court. Another often-ignored fact is that the trial judge 
found Mrs Liebeck to be 20 per cent contributorily negligent.28
Watch this humorous video from ‘Adam Ruins Everything’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?  
v=Q9DXSCpcz9E> which explains the real story of the Liebeck case, and how it has fed into the 
perception of ‘compensation culture’.
27
p. 364
28
12. Product liability
Page 17 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
‘Consumer expectation’ was also relevant in Pollard v Tesco Stores Ltd [2006]. There, the Court of Appeal 
found that the child-resistant top of a bottle of dishwasher detergent was not defective, despite the fact that 
in this case it had been opened by a child. The bottle top did not conform to the relevant British Design 
Standard, but even so, the claim was dismissed on the grounds that consumers would not generally know 
what the relevant design standard was; all they would expect would be that a ‘child-proof’ cap was harder for 
a child to remove than a normal cap. As this was still the case, the product was not defective.
Pause for reflection
Does the outcome of the Tesco case seem correct to you? Would you think a bottle of chemicals from 
which a child could remove the supposedly child-proof cap fits the definition of a ‘defective’ product 
under section 3 of the CPA? This certainly does not seem like strict liability. Furthermore, it seems as 
though the expectation of the manufacturers (who would or ought to know the relevant design 
standard), rather than of the public, was the driving factor in this case. The CPA, it should be 
remembered, specifies that the relevant expectations should be those that ‘persons 
generally’ (including manufacturers) are ‘entitled to expect’ when determining whether or not a 
product is defective (s 3). Does the outcome of this case now mean that consumers are not entitled to 
expect that ‘child-proof’ caps on dangerous substances are, in fact, child-proof?
↵
A question about whether claimants need to prove the exact way in which a defect manifests itself, or if 
it is enough to show that there is ‘some defect’ (a ‘broad-brush’ approach) was answered in Hufford v 
Samsung Electronics (UK) Ltd [2014]. The claimant sought to show that his fridge was defective, as it had 
unexpectedly and seemingly inexplicably caught fire—he could not point to the exact cause but was only 
operating the fridge in conditions of ‘normal use’. The defendant argued that as the claimant could not be 
reasonably specific about the nature of the defect, he should not succeed. HHJ Grant found:
in relation to a claim under the 1987 Act, a claimant does not have to specify or identify with 
accuracy or precision the defect in the product he seeks to establish, and thus prove. It is enough for 
a claimant to prove the existence of a defect in broad or general terms, such as ‘a defect in the 
electrics of the Lexus (motor car)’. (at [25])
Unfortunately, in Hufford, the claim eventually failed, as the claimant was unable to discharge the burden of 
proof that a defect in the fridge had caused the fire, rather than any other cause.29
A claimant must also prove that the item they allege to be defective would be defective with ‘ordinary use’. In 
Wilkes, the claimant sought to render the defendant company, which had provided the artificial hip joint used 
in his hip-replacement operation, liable under the CPA. One part of the artificial hip was a steel femoral shaft 
called a ‘C-Stem’. Three years after Wilkes’ operation, the C-stem fractured inside his body, leaving metal 
debris around the joint. However, the court found that the implant failed because of the excessive and 
unpredictable load it had been subjected to and it was not the case that the hip implant had been subject to 
p. 365
29
12. Product liability
Page 18 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
normal use and had failed earlier than expected. Hickinbottom J said that no medicinal product could be 
absolutely safe or risk-free, and ‘persons generally’ were therefore not entitled to expect that they will be (at 
[65]). Again, this seems like a move further away from strict liability.30
In Gee and others v DePuy International Ltd [2018], a case was brought by 312 individuals affected by ‘adverse 
reaction to metal debris’ following hip replacements, including damage to surrounding tissue and pain, 
swelling and numbness in the leg, resulting in the need for further corrective surgery (revision). In a lengthy 
judgment (170 pages), Mrs Justice Andrews DBE found that the claimants had failed to establish that the 
safety of the product at the relevant time (2002) did not meet the standard that the public generally were 
entitled to expect. The test applied was whether the product had an abnormal tendency to result in damage or 
harm, compared with comparable products. Factors such as cost, avoidability of the harm and the benefit to 
society of the product were found to be relevant.31
The Council considered that the economic risk of producing a defective product should fall on the 
person best equipped to take precautionary steps or to insure against it, namely, the producer. That 
is something the Court must not forget. Nevertheless, depending on the 
↵
circumstances and the 
product, and particularly on the harm, it may be that in an appropriate case the Court could 
legitimately conclude that the public would not be entitled to expect the producer to achieve 
something in terms of safety that is scientifically impossible or prohibitively expensive or which it 
would be impossible to insure against. It all depends on the nature of the product and its intended 
use, and all the other relevant circumstances. (at 167)
Watch our video ‘Intimate products and gendered harm’ on product liability in relation to medical devices and 
the gendered nature of the harms that may occur.
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 12: Intimate products and gendered harm
It is unlikely that this case marks the end of litigation about hip replacements (or indeed other medical 
devices)—further group litigations are being planned, resting on different harms and differing factual 
scenarios.32 In addition, 2022 marked the first time a product liability case reached the Supreme Court.
30
31
p. 366
32
12. Product liability
Page 19 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Hastings v Finsbury Orthopaedics Ltd and another (Scotland) [2022] 
UKSC 19 (SC)
In Hastings, another case about metal-on-metal (MoM) hip replacements, the Scottish court 
considered the impact of Wilkes and Gee, agreeing with the general approach but rejecting the specific 
aspect of Gee that rested on a comparison with other products, instead agreeing, as the claimant 
argued, that a consumer’s ‘entitled expectation’ would be that a product would be at least as good as 
alternatives. The claimant later failed on causation. On appeal to the Supreme Court, his appeal was 
further dismissed, on the basis that:
The nature of the MITCH–Accolade product is such that there can be no entitlement to an 
absolute level of safety … The test of entitled expectation … [is] … whether … the level of 
safety of the MITCH–Accolade product would not be worse, when measured by appropriate 
criteria, than existing non–MoM products that would otherwise have been used. (Lord 
Lloyd-Jones at [19])33
This was to be measured against two criteria: ‘time to revision’ and ‘prospect of success of revision’. 
There was no evidence to support the appellant in relation to either proposition, so the claim failed. 
Hastings therefore is the latest in a long line of cases in which claimants have failed to prove a ‘defect’ 
under the CPA.
Despite there being a limited number of cases concerning the meaning of ‘defect’ for the purposes of applying 
liability under the CPA and, more to the point, that manufacturers (as can be seen in the cases discussed) 
seem quite easily to be able to avoid their products being classed as defective, there have been some successful 
claims.
Abouzaid v Mothercare (UK) Ltd [2000] EWCA Civ 348 (CA)
The claimant, a 12-year-old boy, was injured when trying to fasten a clasp on the strap used to affix a 
‘cosytoes’ (a detachable cover that envelops a baby’s torso and legs) to a pushchair. While the elastic 
on the strap was stretched, he let the strap go and it recoiled, hitting him in the eye, causing injury to 
the retina and leaving him with impaired sight.
The court found that the product (the cosytoes) was defective. In its view, the manufacturer could 
have done more to prevent accidents of this type occurring, such as by using a different method to 
fasten the product to a pushchair, or providing a warning. Because it was so easy to avoid the danger, 
33
p. 367
12. Product liability
Page 20 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
and the manufacturer had not taken adequate steps to do so, the product was defective and 
Mothercare was liable for the harm it caused.34 Put another way, the ease with which the risk of 
injury could have been avoided was taken into account when determining liability.
In Abouzaid the Court of Appeal found that the relevant test was that the product must be judged against the 
expectations of persons generally in all the circumstances of the case—that is, whether the product had the 
level of safety which the general public would expect of such a product at the time the injury occurred. As the 
public would not expect injury to be able to be caused by something as generally innocuous as a cosytoes, this 
particular product could be deemed unsafe, and therefore defective, because it had unexpectedly caused 
injury.
Pause for reflection
Compare the decision (in particular the reasoning) in Abouzaid with Tesco. Are the two decisions 
consistent in the way they have determined what a defective product is (or is not)? Which do you 
think is the better decision and why? One difference between the two cases is that a cosytoes will 
obviously come into close proximity with children, due to its very nature, whereas it might be 
expected that a cleaning chemical would be kept in a safe place away from children by responsible 
parents as an additional safeguard, despite it supposedly being child-proof. However, overall the 
decision in Abouzaid does seem to be more logical and ‘in tune’ with what the expectations of ‘persons 
generally’ might be.
A and others v National Blood Authority [2001] 3 All ER 289 (QBD)
The claimants contracted Hepatitis C, a liver disease, after being supplied with contaminated blood 
during blood transfusions. The people who donated the blood had been infected with the Hepatitis C 
virus but, at the time they donated, there was no way of testing for its presence. At the time of the 
transfusions the medical profession was aware that Hepatitis C existed and that it could be 
transmitted by a blood transfusion, but there was still no way of testing the blood. Thus, it was known 
that some blood provided for transfusions could be contaminated 
↵
with Hepatitis C, but no way of 
telling which blood this was. The public was not warned of this small risk.
The court had to decide whether the contaminated blood was defective under the CPA. The defendants 
argued that the blood could not have been defective because the public was only ‘entitled’ to expect 
the product to be as safe as it could be if reasonable precautions had been taken when handling it and 
there was nothing more that the authority could have done to make the product safer. In short, they 
34
p. 368
12. Product liability
Page 21 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
argued that the risk was unavoidable and this had to be considered when the court looked at ‘all the 
circumstances’ that must be considered (under the CPA, s 3(2)). However, the claimants argued that 
to take such things into account would let ‘questions of fault back in by the back door’ (at 316).
The defendant’s argument was rejected by Burton J, who found the blood to be defective. He held that 
the question of avoidability should not be taken into account as section 3(2) could be interpreted to 
mean ‘all relevant circumstances’: what the producer could or could not have done, therefore, was not 
a relevant consideration when looking at strict liability (as opposed to negligence).35 He defined the 
infected blood as a ‘non-standard’ product—one that does not perform as the producer of the product 
intends—adding that where there is a harmful characteristic in a non-standard product, a decision 
that the product is defective would be ‘straightforward’. The primary question would be whether the 
public accepted the non-standard nature of the product—that is, whether it could be said that the risk 
of some blood being affected was one that had been accepted by the public. On this point, he found 
that the public was entitled to expect blood that was 100 per cent safe. Therefore the blood authority 
was liable.
This was a very claimant-friendly decision. Burton J paid close attention to the meaning of ‘defect’ under the 
CPA. Because the Act itself says that it must be interpreted in line with the EC Directive, he used the 
definitional terms of the Directive rather than those of the Act. In so doing, he provided a three-stage test for 
determining whether a product is defective:
What harmful characteristic in the product caused the injury?
Was the product ‘standard’ or ‘non-standard’?
What are the consumer’s legitimate expectations as to the product?
It therefore becomes harder to establish that there is a defect in a ‘standard’ product than a ‘non-standard’ 
one. However, even with non-standard products, the legitimate expectations of consumers must be 
considered, so being non-standard clearly does not equate to being ‘defective’ in and of itself (see Richardson 
v LRC Products [2000] and now Gee and others v DePuy International Ltd [2018] and Hastings v Finsbury 
Orthopaedics Ltd and another (Scotland) [2022]). What consumers are entitled to expect will depend on 
whether any risk associated with the product is public knowledge and, crucially, whether this risk can be 
objectively considered socially acceptable. Infected blood, according to Burton J, clearly was not socially 
acceptable in any sense (at [56]).
The A judgment was the leading authority on ‘defectiveness’ for nearly 20 years. According to A, where the 
public would not accept the ‘non-standard’ nature of a product, the defendant would be liable. This was true 
irrespective of whether the ‘non-standard’ product could have 
↵
been made standard (the only option 
being to withdraw the product from circulation) or whether the wholesale withdrawal of the product would 
have significant disadvantages to society. In light of Wilkes [2016] and Gee [2018], which as we saw earlier did 
consider other factors in arriving at the decisions that the products were non-defective, at least part of the 
decision must now be in doubt. The approach now to be followed appears to be that outlined in Hastings.
35
p. 369
12. Product liability
Page 22 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
If the point of the CPA was to achieve strict liability for ‘defective’ products that cause harm, then we might 
consider that A was in fact correct despite it not seeming to be fair that the blood authority was held liable, as 
there was literally nothing it could have done at the time to have made the blood safe. Strict liability is, 
however, not meant to be ‘fair’, it is meant to be strict, and the desirability of the outcome (compensation for 
the harm suffered by the claimants) supposedly justifies this. However, A seems somewhat inconsistent with 
most other claims taken under the Act and it might be questioned why this is—was Burton J, perhaps, swayed 
by the number of potential claimants or the very serious nature of the harm done to them, or by the nature of 
blood transfusions being a necessary life-saving measure?
In 2017, the High Court granted a group litigation order to a group of 500 people comprising some of the 
surviving victims and family members of those who died following the infected blood scandal of the 1970s 
and 1980s. Thousands of people are estimated to have died after receiving blood products imported from the 
United States which were infected with Hepatitis C and HIV. As a result of an ongoing public inquiry into the 
scandal, announced by the then Prime Minister Theresa May in July 2017,36 in August 2022 the government 
agreed to compensate survivors and the partners of those who died. The first interim payments of £100,000 
per person were made in October 2022.37 In December 2024, the first full compensation payments were 
accepted by victims, paid by the Infected Blood Compensation Authority (IBCA) as part of a new 
compensation service. Initially, ten people were offered compensation totalling over £13 million, with 25 
more people invited to claim.38 It may therefore matter very much which approach to defective products is 
followed in future.
12.3.3  Causation and limitations
If a defect is found, a claimant must still show that the defect caused the damage. The ordinary principles of 
legal causation apply.39 Therefore, at the point of determining causation, when the claim is against the 
manufacturer of a medical product (e.g. a drug) in particular, the claimant would seem to be no better off than 
under the common law, particularly where there are multiple potential causes of the harm, especially given 
that the idea of ‘materially increasing the risk of harm’ in this type of case appears to have been ruled out in 
Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1988].40 This point was clearly illustrated in XYZ v Schering Health Care 
Ltd [2002], where Mackay J concluded that because the evidence suggesting a 
↵
causal connection 
between the third-generation oral contraceptive pill and cardio-vascular problems was contradictory and 
insufficient, the case would be doomed to fail on causation, so there was no need to decide whether and how 
the CPA would apply.41
Furthermore, time limitations are placed on claims under the CPA. A claimant must bring the claim within 
three years of the harm being suffered (though in ‘latent harm’ situations where the claimant only discovers 
later that harm has been suffered, the three years run from this time, not from when the harm was literally 
caused). While this is quite generous, another limitation period exists, giving claimants only ten years to 
claim from the time the particular product was put into circulation.42 This is to take into account consumer 
expectations—arguably if a product has (successfully) been on the market for ten years, it is not defective. 
What these limitations mean in practice, however, is that if a product has been on the market for nine years 
and 11 months, and then the claimant is harmed by a defect in the product, a claim must be taken almost 
immediately in order not to run out of time. If injury occurs a month later, no claim will be possible.
36
37
38
39
40
p. 370
41
42
12. Product liability
Page 23 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
As long as an action is initiated within the ten-year period it can be decided. In Horne-Roberts v SmithKline 
Beecham [2001], the Court of Appeal ruled that this was the case even where proceedings had originally been 
mistakenly initiated against the wrong producer. The correct producer was later allowed to be substituted in 
the action even though the ten-year period had by then expired. In 2008, the House of Lords referred this 
issue to the European Court of Justice (ECJ), asking for clear guidance on the position where a claimant 
mistakenly names the wrong producer in an action commenced within the limitation period.43 The ECJ ruled 
that certain circumstances would permit substitution of a producer after the expiry of the time limit, despite 
the fact this limit was strict. These included those where the party sued is a wholly owned subsidiary of the 
producer, and ‘the putting into circulation of the product’ had in fact been determined by that producer.44 
Upon the case’s return (then to the Supreme Court), it was unanimously found that domestic law did not 
allow a producer to be substituted as the defendant in place of a wholly owned subsidiary, unless the parent 
company had actually determined when the supplier put the product in circulation. On the facts, this had not 
happened and the appeal was unsuccessful—the claimant was out of time.45
12.3.4  Defences
The availability of defences in the CPA appears to allow manufacturers to say ‘it was not my fault’. Strict 
liability, by definition, ought not to be fault-based.46 While the presence of explicit defences in the CPA is 
controversial, it may be argued that liability under the Act should be strict, but not absolute.
↵
However, of the six defences built into the CPA in section 4,47 one in particular has proved especially 
contentious. Under section 4(1)(e) a manufacturer or other party who finds themselves liable under the Act 
can claim:
that the state of scientific and technical knowledge at the relevant time was not such that a producer 
of products of the same description as the product in question might be expected to have discovered 
the defect if it had existed in his products while they were under his control.
This has become known as the ‘development risks’ or ‘state of the art’ defence. It covers circumstances 
where, sometime after the product was produced, scientific or technical knowledge renders it ‘defective’. Put 
another way, if a discovery is made after the product is put into circulation by the manufacturer, meaning 
that the product would now be regarded as defective, the manufacturer escapes liability (on that occasion 
only, as any time after the first time the defect would be known). Ironically, therefore, under the CPA the 
Thalidomide claimants are unlikely to have been better off, despite this tragedy and other pharmaceutical 
harms being key factors leading to the movement to strict liability.48 As Colin Scott, Julia Black and Ross 
Cranston have pointed out, large pharmaceutical companies operating from the UK are the biggest 
beneficiaries of the inclusion of the (optional) defence.49 In fact, the UK Government was one of the most 
vocal when it came to implementing the Directive and was very much in favour of not using the derogation 
provision that would have allowed the defence to be excluded.
43
44 
45
46
p. 371
47
48
49
12. Product liability
Page 24 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
Does the development risks defence sound, in essence, like a crude version of the Bolam test in 
negligence which applies to professionals when determining whether they have fallen below the 
expected standard of care? In that test, if the professional concerned can show that they acted in the 
same way as others from a respectable body of professional opinion would have done, they will not be 
in breach of their duty of care. This makes it harder to find professionals liable in negligence.50 The 
development risks defence, as it is phrased in section 4(1)(e), appears to give manufacturers the 
ability to say that ‘other manufacturers would not have been able to spot the defect, given the state of 
scientific and technical knowledge’. Do you think this is what it means? Is this a subjective or an 
objective test?
Case C-300/95 Commission of the European Communities v United 
Kingdom, EU:C:1997:255 (ECJ) (also known as EC v UK)
The CPA was meant to implement the terms of the EC Directive. The European Commission was 
concerned that the terminology of section 4(1)(e) of the CPA (the ‘development risks defence’) 
deviated from the wording of the defence under Article 7 of the Directive, creating what could be 
called a subjective test, as it focused on the conduct and abilities of the 
↵
‘reasonable 
manufacturer’. Article 7(e) had been differently worded and required an objective assessment of the 
state of scientific and technical knowledge at the time the product was put into circulation. It said that 
the defence would apply when:
[t]he state of scientific and technical knowledge at the time when the producer put the 
product into circulation was not such as to enable the existence of the defect to be 
discovered.
In EC v UK, the ECJ said that the relevant test was to ask whether the information (that would make 
the product defective) was ‘accessible’ to the producer of the product concerned at the relevant time.
Relying on ‘accessibility’ of knowledge means that even if someone in the world might know the product is 
unsafe (because this is shown by later scientific or technical discoveries), the producer might not necessarily 
be able to know this. This, however, appears to be a subjective rather than objective assessment. The ECJ 
suggested that this meant, for example, that if a scientific discovery was made in a remote part of Manchuria 
(a region of China), and written up only in an obscure Manchurian journal (or not at all), then this 
information will not be ‘accessible’ to all producers.51 However, if a discovery is made in France, even if this 
was written up in French and published in a French journal, the information would be likely to be deemed to 
50
p. 372
51
12. Product liability
Page 25 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
be accessible to the majority of manufacturers (particularly European manufacturers covered by the 
Directive). In short, accessible information means that risks become foreseeable, and therefore the defence 
cannot apply.
In A, the defendant blood authority also contested the claim on the basis that even if a defect in the product 
could be established, they could avail themselves of the development risks defence. Burton J, however, ruled 
that the defence was not applicable, as the general risk that the blood was contaminated with the virus was 
known (albeit unavoidable, as this knowledge did not extend to being able to find out whether a particular 
bag of blood was defective). This decision means that the defence could only be used the very first time a risk 
becomes known. The blood authority knew the risk existed, so the defence could no longer apply.
Pause for reflection
Do you think the National Blood Authority should have been found liable, especially given that it is 
obliged under statute to provide blood and could not at the time screen for the presence of the 
Hepatitis C virus in blood samples?
Check our pointers <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-  
resources/horsey9e-chapter-12-pointers-to-pause-for-reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes? 
options=showName> on how to answer the questions posed in this ‘pause for reflection’.
12.3.5  Overall effect of the Consumer Protection Act 1987
There have been very few cases under the CPA. While this might be in part due to high litigation costs, it 
might be argued that the Act has had a more silent effect in that the notion that manufacturers can be found 
to be strictly liable for harm caused by their products, even without negligence, may encourage more out-of- 
court settlements or manufacturers to make 
↵
their products safer. It might have been thought that the 
decision in A, where strict liability appeared to be taken to its strictest point, would mean that more claims 
would be brought by consumers. However, this does not appear to have happened and more recent cases tend 
to suggest that there is little benefit to bringing a claim under the Act rather than a claim in negligence, as 
well as a move away from the consumer-friendliness of A. Considerations of ‘fault’ seem to have crept into 
the CPA, particularly in the sense of what a defect can be said to be, despite Burton J’s attempts in A not to 
‘dilute’ the intentions underlying the CPA.
p. 373
12. Product liability
Page 26 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Counterpoint
It also appears that the development risks defence undermines the aims of the CPA. Arguably, what it 
does is switch the burden of proof onto producers to show that when they designed the product that 
has caused harm, they took the care expected of an expert/manufacturer at that time. In this respect, 
although strict liability in general and the CPA in particular were meant to make things easier for 
claimants in terms of design defects (remember that at common law the duty is clear and the courts 
are often willing to infer that a manufacturer was in breach (Grant),52 meaning that it is relatively 
easy to sue for defects caused by the manufacturing process), it does not seem to have improved much 
at all. Claimants in the Thalidomide cases, for example, would have been no better off than they were 
in taking their claims in negligence. This, combined with the small number of cases brought under 
the CPA (and the even smaller number of successful claims), seems to suggest that it has been largely 
ineffective in achieving its supposed aims.53
Manufacturers have argued throughout the history of the implementation of the CPA that strict 
liability would, for example, hinder innovation and the placement of new, better and more cost- 
effective products onto the market. Strict liability, in their eyes, leads to increased costs, which in turn 
must be passed on to consumers. In turn, this leads to the question of whether private law 
mechanisms are an appropriate response to defects in products at all, or whether increased public law 
regulation would better benefit society. In relation to strict liability for products, the argument is 
whether we feel it is better that manufacturers/producers should bear the costs of unknown risks 
(through insurance?) or whether consumers, through product choice, would be better equipped to 
make decisions based on the level of risk they are prepared to accept. Forcing producers to 
compensate through a strict liability regime forces product prices up (as producers bear all, or most, 
of the risk). In any case, imposing new or additional burdens on producers in the current economic 
climate would seem very unlikely.
However, the inhibition of innovation and design does not seem to have occurred in the nearly 40 
years since the CPA came into force—perhaps again suggesting that the Act itself is not as ‘strict’ as it 
could have been in imposing liability on manufacturers and that the behaviour of producers is 
unlikely to have been significantly altered by the presence of the Act.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-12-3>.
52
53
12. Product liability
Page 27 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
12.4  Part 1 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987—Annotated
In Figure 12.1 we have annotated Part 1 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, highlighting the key issues 
discussed in this chapter.
Access an interactive annotated copy of the Act <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-  
student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-12-annotated-statute-the-consumer-projection-act-1987-figure-12-2- 
interactive> and click on the highlighted phrases for author commentary. You can also download a non- 
interactive copy of the annotated extract <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-  
resources/horsey9e-chapter-12-annotated-statute-the-consumer-protection-act-1987-figure-12-1>.
p. 374
p. 375
p. 376
p. 377
12. Product liability
Page 28 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
12. Product liability
Page 29 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
12. Product liability
Page 30 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
12. Product liability
Page 31 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Figure 12.1 The Consumer Protection Act 1987, Part 1
12.5  Claiming under Part 1 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987—At a 
glance
See Table 12.1.
p. 378
12. Product liability
Page 32 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Table 12.1 Summary of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, Part 1. You can also download a copy of this 
table <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/  
horsey9e-additional-material-chapter-12-cpa-at-a-glance-table?options=showName>.
Issue
Relevant 
sections
Explanation
Who can sue?
Sections 2(1) and 
5(1)
A person who ‘suffers damage as a result of a defective product’ (see 
definitions of ‘damage’ and ‘defect’)
Who can be sued?
Sections 1(2) and 
5(2)
Manufacturers, producers, ‘own-branders’ and importers into the United 
Kingdom. Some suppliers can also be sued
What damage can 
be claimed for?
Section 5(1)
See also ss 5(2) 
and 5(4)
Death, personal injury and property damage
Pure economic loss excluded and property damage must exceed £275
What is a ‘product’?
Section 1(2)
See also s 45
Goods and electricity, component parts and raw materials
‘Goods’ includes substances, growing crops, things on land and any ship, 
aircraft or vehicle
What is a ‘defect’?
Section 3(1)
See also s 3(2) 
(a)–(c)
A defect exists when ‘the safety of a product is not such that persons generally 
are entitled to expect’—this is the most analysed aspect of the legislation in 
case law
Packaging, normal use, instructions and warnings may be taken into account
Are any defences 
appropriate?
Section 4(1)(a)– 
(f)
There are six defences available under the Act
Contributory negligence is also applicable
12.6  Conclusion
In this chapter we have considered the ways in which liability for defective products is regulated in tort law. 
This should be understood against a background knowledge of the provisions of contract law, which provide 
the backdrop to the development of the law of negligence in this area. However, despite this protection, as 
well as reform to the doctrine of privity of contract, many end-users of products remain unable to take 
contractual claims in relation to faulty or defective products. There are two main reasons for this. First, end- 
users who did not purchase the product (and thereby enter a contract with the retailer) usually cannot sue 
despite changes to the doctrine of privity. Secondly, under contract it is impossible to directly 
↵
sue the 
manufacturer, which in many cases will be the preferred option. Thus the law of contract has limitations in 
terms of consumer protection.
This chapter outlined the way the tort of negligence has been used by claimants who suffer damage because of 
a defective product. As in all negligence claims, the hurdles of establishing duty, breach and causation must 
be overcome. While the first two are not generally difficult (as Donoghue gives the duty and a breach is often 
p. 379
12. Product liability
Page 33 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
2
3
→
→
inferred on the facts), causation issues can often stand in the way of a successful claim. This is particularly 
true when considering design defects and it was recognition of these limitations in negligence that led in part 
to calls for strict liability in this area.
Strict liability (where the producer of a product is held liable without the need for the injured party to show 
fault) for defective products was meant to have been introduced by the enactment of Part 1 of the CPA. 
However, the Act’s definition of defect is weak, being based on what ‘persons generally are entitled to expect’, 
and much of the little case law has been devoted to finding that products are not defective. Furthermore, the 
inclusion of defences in the Act, particularly the ‘development risks defence’, seems to suggest that liability 
remains somewhat subjective and contains elements of fault, thus not rendering it totally strict.
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of having a system of strict liability in relation to defective 
products? Does strict liability make more sense when the harm suffered is personal injury?
Who should bear the risks and costs associated with innovation and increased consumer choice?
Do the provisions of Part 1 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 achieve their aims?
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-12-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Answering the problem question
Consider again the problem question at the start of this chapter. Now having read about the topic, what 
would be your advice to the claimants?
Here are some pointers to get you started:
The claimants would need to sue the ‘producer’, RHP, under s 1 of Part 1 of the Consumer Protection Act 
1987, if they have suffered harms that are recognised under the Act (s 5). They would also need to establish 
that the drug is a ‘product’ covered by the Act. If they succeed in their claim, RHP will be strictly liable (i.e. 
without the need to prove fault), subject to any defences.
The central question is whether the drug was ‘defective’ (s 3). The different cases looking at the meaning 
of ‘defect’ should be considered, especially the most recent (and only Supreme Court) decision in Hastings.
12. Product liability
Page 34 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
If it is, does RHP have any defences? Of particular interest here would be the ‘development risks 
defence’ (s 4(1)(e)). One criterion is that any knowledge that was published should have been ‘accessible’ (EC 
v UK)—was it?
If you need some more guidance:
See the annotated version of the problem with issues and cases to consider <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-12-annotated- 
problem-question-interactive>.
Check your answer against the suggested outline answer <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-12-answers-to-problem-question>.
Further reading
Further reading on this subject often centres on critiques of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 and in particular the 
development risks defence. More recent work includes Eisler and Nolan, who both provide critical commentary on the 
decision in Wilkes about how ‘defects’ should be determined (though note both are pre-Gee), while reaching 
somewhat different conclusions.
Department of Trade and Industry Guide to the Consumer Protection Act 1987
Eisler, Jacob ‘One Step Forward and Two Steps Back in Product Liability: The Search for Clarity in the Identification of 
Defects’ [2017] Cambridge Law Journal 233
Fairgrieve, Duncan and Geraint Howells ‘General Product Safety—A Revolution Through Reform?’ (2006) 69 Modern 
Law Review 59
Gerling, Andrea ‘A Matter of Degree: How a Jury Decided That a Coffee Spill is Worth $2.9 Million’ Wall Street Journal 1 
September 1994
Giliker, Paula ‘Strict Liability for Defective Goods: The Ongoing Debate’ (2003) 24 Business Law Review 87
Howells, Geraint and Mark Mildred ‘Infected Blood: Defect and Discoverability: A First Exposition of the EC Product 
Liability Directive’ (2002) 65 Modern Law Review 95
Newdick, Christopher ‘The Development Risks Defence of the Consumer Protection Act 1987’ [1988] Cambridge Law 
Journal 455
Nolan, Donal ‘Strict Product Liability for Design Defects’ (2018) 134 Law Quarterly Review 176
Wuyts, Daily ‘The Product Liability Directive—More Than Two Decades of Defective Products in Europe’ (2014) 5 
Journal of European Tort Law 1
12. Product liability
Page 35 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-12-web-links?options=showName>.
Notes
 
1. The facts of Donoghue are set out in section 2.2.
 
2. See Chapter 7.
 
3. See e.g. Scrutton LJ in Hodge v Anglo-American Oil Co [1922], who described goods rendered ‘dangerous’ by 
negligent construction as ‘a wolf in sheep’s clothing’ (at 187).
 
4. See Wormleighton v Cape Intermediate Holdings Ltd [2024] EWHC 1971 (KB).
 
5. Discussed in section 7.5.3.
 
6. See Chapter 7.
 
7. This theory is also discussed in Chapter 7 in relation to Murphy (see Counterpoint box in section 7.4).
 
8. Although this has now been ruled out for buildings in the sense that foundations cannot be regarded as a separate 
component of a building.
 
9. The idea was considered in Finesse Group Ltd v Bryson Products [2013], see in particular [28]–[29].
 
10. See also the (obiter) comments of Lloyd LJ in Aswan Engineering v Lupdine Ltd [1987].
 
11. For explanation of these different types of damages, see section 21.2.
 
12. Examples of producers recalling products with dangerous defects include Samsung recalling its Galaxy phone (see 
Cristina Criddle ‘Why is the Samsung Galaxy Note 7 catching fire?’ The Telegraph 11 October 2016) and Whirlpool’s 
tumble dryers (BBC News ‘Whirlpool told to recall dryers in “unprecedented” government move’ 12 June 2019).
 
13. See Chapter 9.
 
14. Howmet Ltd v Economy Devices Ltd and others [2016].
 
15. So Tyler, in the earlier scenarios, may have difficulties establishing that the drug was the cause of his stomach ulcer.
 
16. This does not mean that similar scandals cannot happen. More recently, campaigners highlighted the use of sodium 
valproate (used to treat epilepsy, bipolar disorder and other conditions) by pregnant women, despite being known by 
the medical profession to be teratogenic. See Sarah Boseley ‘Birth defect risks of sodium valproate “known 40 years 
ago”’ The Guardian 26 September 2017.
 
17. In fact, scientists only discovered how the drug caused the side effects it did in 2009, though this still would not 
prove that the drug did do this in any individual case, as other (genetic) factors could also cause the same symptoms. 
For a discussion of the difficulties posed by multiple potential causes, see section 9.2.2.1. Thalidomide manufacturers 
have never admitted negligence, though they have issued apologies—see BBC News ‘Thalidomide apology insulting, 
campaigners say’ 1 September 2012.
 
18. Directive 85/374/EEC.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
12. Product liability
Page 36 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
19. This is kept under almost constant review. In 2017, the European Commission evaluated the performance of the 
Directive, including whether it continues to meet consumers’ and others’ needs—and, interestingly, whether it is fit for 
purpose in an increasingly technological age, with specific reference to the ‘Internet of Things’ (European Commission 
‘Public Consultation on the rules on liability of the producer for damage caused by a defective product’ 10 January 
2017)—it received responses from 657 stakeholders. The fifth report on the Product Liability Directive was published in 
2018, concluding that despite products having increased in complexity since the Directive was issued, and although 
some legal terms (including ‘defect’ and ‘product’) may need better definition (especially in light of emerging 
technologies), it remained an adequate tool. The Commission established an expert group on liability and new 
technologies to keep these areas under review and to ‘issue guidance on the Product Liability Directive and a report 
on the broader implications for, potential gaps in and orientations for, the liability and safety frameworks for artificial 
intelligence, the Internet of Things and robotics’. Its report was published in February 2020. Latterly, EU member 
states voted on a new Product Liability Directive (2022/0302) to replace the 1985 Directive. The new Directive was 
published on 18 November 2024 and its provisions will come into force in all member states by 9 December 2026.
 
20. Brought into force 1 March 1988. As the UK is no longer part of the EU, the new Directive will not come into force 
here, meaning that there will be significant differences in how product liability claims will be handled in the UK 
compared to in EU member states. It will be for the government to decide how far to align with the new EU Directive.
 
21. You may find it helpful to read this section alongside the annotated version of the CPA (section 12.4) or the CPA ‘at 
a glance’ table in section 12.5.
 
22. See e.g. Busby v Berkshire Bed Co Ltd [2018] at [21].
 
23. e.g. blood products provided for transfusion purposes: A v National Blood Authority [2001]. The original definition 
did not include agricultural produce or game, unless this had been subjected to an industrial process (e.g. in a meat- 
packing factory). EU member states were free to include or exclude this produce under the 1985 Directive. However, 
though a later Directive made inclusion compulsory after the BSE (‘mad cow disease’) crisis, the requirement has since 
been removed again. Agricultural produce is therefore not included within the definition of ‘product’ under the CPA.
 
24. See also Busby v Berkshire Bed Co Ltd [2018], where the claimant fell off her new bed during sex, resulting in 
paralysis. Despite a finding of fact that the bed was not ‘of satisfactory quality’ (for contract law purposes), it was not 
found to be defective under the CPA, and her injury had been merely an accident which ‘required a most unfortunate 
and unusual combination of positioning on the bed and movement which I do not believe would have been 
foreseeable by any reasonable person prior to the incident’ (HHJ Cotter KC at [142]).
 
25. New rules on cigarette packaging came into force in May 2016 after tobacco firms lost a legal challenge (British 
American Tobacco UK Ltd and others, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for Health [2016]). Packets of ten 
cigarettes are no longer available and for larger packs standardised green packaging is used. Pictures depicting the 
harmful effects of smoking must now cover 65 per cent of the front and back of every packet of cigarettes, with 
additional warnings on the top of the pack.
 
26. Controversially, since Rees v Darlington Area Health Authority [2002] a ‘conventional’ award of £15,000 for loss of 
autonomy may now be awarded in such cases, though this in no way compensates for the financial losses caused by 
the negligence.
 
27. It should be noted here that one of the major differences—and possibly a contributing factor to the commonly held 
perception that in the US you can sue for anything—between the US and UK tort systems is the presence of a jury on 
tort cases. Typically, jurors tend to feel more sympathy to claimants (and antipathy to defendants) and this may be 
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
12. Product liability
Page 37 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
particularly true where cases are taken against large corporations. Jurors also ‘decide’ damages awards, and in the US 
there is far more scope for non-compensatory damages (e.g. punitive or aggravated damages) than in the UK (see 
Chapter 21). In a 1998 case against Philip Morris tobacco (one of the world’s largest producers of cigarettes), a jury 
awarded $81 million to the widow and children of a man who had smoked the company’s Marlboro cigarettes for 40 
years (since before the time tobacco companies acknowledged the dangers of smoking). The family had sued for $100 
million but the award was reduced as the court found the man 50 per cent responsible for the harm he suffered. Less 
than two months later, in another claim against Philip Morris, another jury awarded $51.5 million to a cigarette 
smoker with terminal lung cancer (though this was later appealed). More recently, in 2018, Monsanto (now owned by 
Bayer) was found liable for gardener DeWayne Johnson’s terminal cancer caused by ‘Roundup’, one of the company’s 
weedkiller products. The jury awarded him $289 million damages. There have also been subsequent successful cases, 
with substantial damages awards. See also Patricia Cohen ‘Roundup maker to pay $10 billion to settle cancer suits’ 
The New York Times 24 June 2020—reportedly one of the biggest settlements in US litigation history.
 
28. See Chapter 10. .
 
29. See also Ide v ATB Sales Ltd and another [2008].
 
30. Contrast the decision in an Australian case brought on behalf of hundreds of women left with excruciating pain and 
other symptoms due to transvaginal mesh implants. In Gill v Ethicon Sàrl (No 5) [2019], Katzmann J found that lack of 
an adequate warning affected consumer expectations and that ‘[w]hat persons generally are entitled to expect of 
medical devices is also affected by what the manufacturer says or does not say about them’ (at 3370). The producers, 
Johnson & Johnson, were subsequently unsuccessful in an appeal.
 
31. Note, however, that the product in question was removed from sale in 2013.
 
32. Note also that new Regulations are due to be enacted following the Independent Medicines and Medical Devices 
Safety Review of 2020 (‘Cumberledge Review’), which was highly critical of the failure of the UK’s existing regulations 
to protect some categories of patient from the side effects of medical devices. There is concern that some products, 
such as surgical mesh, require more regulatory oversight and that the UK has fallen behind compared to international 
practice (notably, by comparison with EU regulation, which was updated in 2017 but due to quirks of Brexit, not 
adopted by the UK). The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) conducted a consultation in 
2021 and the government issued its response in June 2022—this is not necessarily the final word but does indicate 
what may likely follow, including that manufacturers must have insurance in place to meet the costs of compensation 
to patients and users of medical devices who are injured by them.
 
33. Hastings [2022].
 
34. This may partly have been because of the manufacturer’s own reputation as a leader in the baby products market— 
see Pill LJ at [27].
 
35. It should be noted that this determination may not have survived an appeal had this case gone further. It is also 
potentially in doubt after Gee and Hastings.
 
36. See Jim Duffy ‘Contaminated blood: statutory inquiry announced’ UK Human Rights blog 7 November 2017. The 
progress of the Inquiry can be found at www.infectedbloodinquiry.org.uk/news <http://  
www.infectedbloodinquiry.org.uk/news>.
 
37. In November 2022, it was revealed one in three of those infected were children: BBC News ‘1 in 3 infected with HIV 
in blood scandal was a child’ 9 November 2022.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
12. Product liability
Page 38 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
38. In its first budget after coming to power in 2024, the Labour government set aside set aside £11.8 billion for the 
compensation scheme (see Cabinet Office Press Release ‘First compensation offered to infected blood victims after 
decades of injustice’ 12 December 2024: www.gov.uk/government/news/first-compensation-offered-to-infected- 
blood-victims-after-decades-of-injustice <https://www.gov.uk/government/news/first-compensation-offered-to-  
infected-blood-victims-after-decades-of-injustice>).
 
39. As outlined in Chapter 9.
 
40. For a full discussion of the development and treatment of the concept of ‘material increase in risk’, see section 
9.2.2.1.
 
41. The reason for the failure of the claim in Busby v Berkshire Bed Co Ltd [2018] was that the injury had not been 
caused by the bed, but by the activity of the claimant (at [105]). Though this was the case, HHJ Cotter KC also 
considered whether there was a defect under the CPA and/or a breach of contract and/or negligence.
 
42. Limitation Act 1980, s 11A(3).
 
43. O’Byrne v Aventis Pasteur SA [2008]. The ECJ had already once provided guidance on the matter, in O’Byrne v Sanofi 
Pasteur MSD Ltd [2006], though evidently this was not clear.
 
44. Aventis Pasteur v O’Byrne [2009].
 
45. O’Byrne v Aventis Pasteur SA [2010].
 
46. Compare the Vaccine Damage Payments Act 1979, under which a tax-free statutory sum is awarded to people who 
become severely disabled as a result of vaccination against certain diseases, without proof of fault. The one-off lump 
sum payment increased from £100,000 to £120,000 in July 2007, having previously increased from £40,000 to £100,000 
in 2000. In December 2020, the Department of Health and Social Care announced that the government was adding 
Covid-19 vaccines to the Vaccine Damage Payments Scheme.
 
47. Contributory negligence is also available though not listed in s 4.
 
48. Which is exactly why the Law Commission recommended that parties injured by defective products should be 
compensated no matter what care had been taken by the producer (Liability for Defective Products (Law Com No 82, 
Cmnd 6831, 1977)).
 
49. Colin Scott, Julia Black and Ross Cranston Cranston’s Consumers and the Law (CUP 2000) 194.
 
50. See section 8.3.2.
 
51. EC v UK [1997], Opinion of AG Tesauro at [23].
 
52. It seems that this is also a possibility under the CPA: see Ide v ATB Sales [2008].
 
53. Though of course it may have a ‘hidden’ effect in encouraging either out-of-court settlements or swift(er) recall of 
defective products by manufacturers. See e.g. David Sanderson ‘Hundreds burnt by toxic sofas to share £20 million 
compensation’ The Times 27 April 2010; BBC News ‘Pushchair maker Maclaren agrees compensation’ 6 May 2010; BBC 
News ‘Robinsons Fruit Shoot children’s drink in safety recall’ 3 July 2012; BBC News ‘Aston Martin recalls 17,000 cars 
over possible defective part’ 5 February 2014; BBC News ‘Aldi chocolate recalled in salmonella scare’ 5 January 2015; 
Hilary Osborne ‘Ikea recalls child safety gates following accidents’ The Guardian 23 June 2016; Mared Gruffydd ‘B&Q 
adds another heater to recall list amid electric shock and fire fears’ Daily Express 20 March 2021.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
12. Product liability
Page 39 of 39
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
