16. Invasion of privacy
Page 1 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
16. Invasion of privacy
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0016
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter examines the nascent ‘tort’ of invasion of privacy. It first considers why no free-standing tort of invasion of privacy 
exists, before looking at breach of confidence—a legal concept straddling tort and equity and concerned with ‘secrets’ and 
judicially adapted to protect privacy by developing the new tort of misuse of private information. The chapter then asks 
whether developments in the law protecting privacy—particularly in the wake of the Human Rights Act 1998—threaten 
freedom of expression and therefore the general public’s ‘right’ to information, particularly about celebrities, including royalty 
and politicians.
Keywords: 
Keywords, tort law, invasion of privacy, breach of confidence, misuse of private information, Human Rights Act, 
freedom of expression, damages
Problem question
Read this problem question carefully and keep it in mind while you are working through the 
chapter that follows. At the end of the chapter you will be able to apply what you have learnt to the 
problem question and advise the relevant parties.
Elizabeth is the fiancée of a Premiership footballer, Alessandro Talentti. She has always been happy to 
be photographed with Alessandro at awards evenings, film premieres and charity events and also 
while out with her girlfriends shopping or lunching, or with other footballers’ wives and girlfriends 
watching football matches.
p. 446
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 2 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
→
→
Recently, as she has started to organise her wedding, which she wants to be intimate and private, 
Elizabeth has found the media attention intrusive and has had several arguments with photographers 
wanting to take her picture whilst out shopping or in small, quiet restaurants. One photographer, 
Chris, is particularly persistent and takes photographs when she is leaving a hospital after visiting her 
mother who is very ill. He also photographed her (using a long-range lens) going in to a small London 
bridal boutique when she was shopping for bridesmaids’ dresses with her young sister and niece.
On the wedding day—the press having been successfully excluded from the venue—one of the 
caterers secretly takes some pictures of the ceremony and the reception, where there were many 
famous guests. He sells these pictures to Peachy!, a well-known celebrity glossy magazine; the 
pictures are published in the following week’s issue and online as an ‘exclusive’. Meanwhile, a 
journalist contacts Alessandro saying he has found out that he had a brief affair the previous year 
while away at a football tournament and that this information is going to be published the following 
day.
Advise Elizabeth and Alessandro as to any legal actions they might be able to pursue.
16.1  Introduction
Consider the following examples:
A famous pop singer is photographed entering an eating disorders treatment centre and the pictures 
are published in a tabloid newspaper.
Long-range photographs are taken of a television newsreader, with her children on holiday, 
sunbathing and swimming in the sea. These are published on the website of a tabloid newspaper.
A British actress marries a Hollywood actor. They agreed to sell their wedding photos to Look and See! 
magazine but secret photos of the ceremony are published in Look Here! magazine.
A teenager is caught on CCTV vandalising a shop front. Images of him are published in a local 
newspaper and put on the local TV news.
An Olympic gold-medallist is discovered to be having an extramarital affair by a reporter who wants to 
publish this information ‘in the public interest’.
In each of these examples the parties’ privacy has, in some way, been invaded. Privacy is consistently a ‘hot 
topic’, from the 2012 Leveson Report into media practices, to the treatment of Prince Harry and Meghan 
Markle, Duke and Duchess of Sussex, by sections of the British media.1 In modern society, there are obviously 
many ways in which information about others can be collected and transmitted, meaning that the protection 
of privacy is more relevant than ever.
p. 447
1
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 3 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
That said, it took a long time for privacy to be protected by tort—and really this was driven by developments 
following the Human Rights Act (HRA) 1998. Limited protection was always possible: torts of trespass (to 
person and land), private nuisance, malicious falsehood and defamation all protect some aspects of privacy. 
Further protection comes from property rights, equity and copyright laws, as well as, inter alia, the Protection 
from Harassment Act 1997 and the Data Protection Act 1998.2 However, it was not until 2014 that we could 
say there was an actual privacy tort—this is when the court first confirmed the tort of misuse of private 
information.3
Many (but not all) claims regarding privacy violations are made by ‘celebrities’—alleging (usually but not 
always) media intrusion into their private lives. ‘Privacy’ has therefore become somewhat contentious. When 
asking whether someone should have the right to remain private in a particular situation, regard is often had 
to their fame, notoriety or their 
↵
own self-exposure. Some believe that celebrities should accept the 
inevitable media and other interference fame brings. However, celebrity cases set precedents that apply for 
everyone and, while many of us will never be intruded upon by the media, others are (see e.g. Venables v News 
Group Newspapers [2001]; X (a woman formerly known as Mary Bell) v SO [2003]) and there are numerous 
other ways our privacy can be invaded (see e.g. Wainwright v Home Office [2003]; Peck v UK [2003]; Rhodes v 
OPO [2015]). Considering findings from the Leveson Inquiry, including about illegal phone hacking of 
teenage murder victim Milly Dowler and others’ mobile telephones, as well as high-profile sports, music, 
television, political and business personalities and others seeking injunctions and super-injunctions to 
prevent information about them being published, media intrusion and the consequent invasions of privacy it 
causes are rarely not in the spotlight.
This chapter considers how tort protects against invasions of privacy, by looking at the development of 
breach of confidence, a legal concept straddling tort and equity, once concerned with ‘secrets’ and now 
judicially adapted to protect privacy, in the form of ‘misuse of private information’. We consider whether 
developments in the law protecting privacy threaten freedom of expression and therefore the public’s ‘right’ 
to information, particularly about celebrities, including royalty and politicians.
16.2  A tort of invasion of privacy?
Successive Parliaments have been unwilling to create a privacy tort—despite numerous calls to do so. This 
legislative reluctance can be illustrated with a short review of Committee Reports and Bills presented to 
Parliament and parliamentary opinion thereafter.
2
3
p. 448
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 4 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Attempts to regulate privacy
In the 1960s three Bills directly relating to privacy were presented before Parliament; two of which 
expressly provided for an actionable right for citizens to claim that their privacy had been infringed. 
Each failed. Lord Mancroft’s Bill (1961) was withdrawn due to lack of governmental support; Mr 
Alexander Lyon’s Bill (1967) was rejected for being too limited; and Mr Brian Walden’s Bill (1969) was 
rejected for encroaching too far into freedom of expression.4
Soon after, the Younger Committee presented its Report on Privacy,5 which concluded that there was 
‘no need to extend the law of privacy further’. The principal objection related to defining ‘privacy’, but 
it was also thought that sufficient remedies already existed, and preferred self-regulation of media 
outlets. Similar views were advocated by the McGregor Commission in 1977.6 These reports were 
followed by two Bills presented within the 1988–9 parliamentary sessions—again, both failed.7
↵
In 1990, the Calcutt Committee again rejected the creation of a tort of privacy in favour of press 
self-regulation through the Press Complaints Commission.8 Even after reviewing the laws of France, 
Germany and the United States, the Committee could not satisfactorily define ‘privacy’. Its final 
statement expressing the government’s view was presented in 1995. Once again self-regulation was 
preferred and no intention to introduce a tort of privacy was expressed.9 Although in 2004 the House 
of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee advocated a specific right of privacy,10 it later 
acknowledged that:
To draft a law defining a right to privacy which is both specific in its guidance but also 
flexible enough to apply fairly to each case which would be tested against it could be almost 
impossible. Many people would not want to seek redress through the law, for reasons of cost 
and risk. In any case, we are not persuaded that there is significant public support for a 
privacy law.11
As already noted, a key problem has been the lack of a coherent definition of what privacy is. One reason for 
this may be that ‘privacy’ is not the same for all people. It has variously been described as ‘the right to be let 
alone’,12 to be free from an ‘unwanted gaze’ or ‘unauthorised interference with a person’s seclusion of 
himself’13 or to have unfettered control of information about or images of oneself.14
Other nations have well-established privacy protection, suggesting that workable definitions are possible.15 
However, these protections vary in their intensity, which may be one of the factors making finding a 
universal definition so difficult. In France, for example, invasion of privacy is a crime, supported by civil 
injunctions; therefore people, including ‘celebrities’, can keep their private lives very private indeed.16 
German law offers less protection but its Constitution protects information about citizens’ personal and 
private lives, a concept developed by the courts over time in a flexible way.
4
5
6
7
p. 449
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15 
16 
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 5 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
As early as 1931, Percy H Winfield said that he hoped the House of Lords would develop a new tort to protect 
privacy. However, 60 years later, the common law still had no defined privacy protection, clearly illustrated 
by Kaye v Robertson and Sport Newspapers Ltd [1991].
Kaye v Robertson and Sport Newspapers Ltd [1991] FSR 62 (CA)
Gorden Kaye (at the time a well-known TV personality) suffered extensive brain injuries when a 
billboard collapsed onto his car. An editor and photographer from the Sunday Sport newspaper gained 
entry to his hospital room, photographing him semi-conscious in bed and conducting an ‘interview’, 
later marketing these as a ‘scoop’. His injuries meant Kaye had no memory of this occurring. Kaye’s 
agent sought an injunction to prevent the pictures and story being published. As there was no specific 
privacy tort to claim under, he resorted to other torts, including defamation, passing off, malicious 
falsehood and trespass to the person.
All but the malicious falsehood claim failed. This meant only that the newspaper had to remove any 
references that said Kaye had consented to being interviewed or photographed—the photos were still 
published. The Court of Appeal recognised that it was a clear invasion of privacy to be photographed 
in a hospital bed, particularly when one had no power to prevent this, but nothing more could be 
done. English tort law had created various ‘boxes’ of liability which, if a claim does not fit into them, 
leave no redress:
If ever a person has a right to be let alone by strangers with no public interest to pursue, it 
must surely be when he lies in hospital recovering from brain surgery and in no more than 
partial command of his faculties. It is this invasion of his privacy which underlies the 
[claimant’s] complaint. Yet it alone, however gross, does not entitle him to relief in English 
law. (Bingham LJ at 70)
In Kaye, the Court of Appeal recognised the need for a tort of invasion of privacy but deferred responsibility 
for this to Parliament: ‘The facts of the present case are a graphic illustration of the desirability of Parliament 
considering whether and in what circumstances statutory provision can be made to protect the privacy of 
individuals’ (Glidewell LJ at 66).
Similarly, in Malone v Metropolitan Police Commissioner (No 2) [1979], a case concerning telephone tapping, 
Sir Robert Megarry V-C emphasised that the courts should not ‘legislate’ where no right has been created. He 
stated that ‘where Parliament has abstained from legislating on a point that is plainly suitable for legislation, 
it is indeed difficult for the court to lay down new rules of common law or equity that will carry out the 
Crown’s treaty obligations’ (at 373, referring to the state’s obligations under the ECHR). This desire to refrain 
from judicial intervention in favour of legislative action was also acknowledged in Wainwright. Lord 
Hoffmann (with whom the other law lords all agreed) explicitly agreed with Sir Robert Megarry V-C, 
rejecting any ‘broad brush approach’ of the common law (at [33]) and stated that English law neither 
p. 450
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 6 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
contained nor needed a specific privacy tort, and might even be unable to create one (at [18]). A year later, in 
Campbell v Mirror Group Newspapers [2004], Lady Hale said: ‘our law cannot, even if it wanted to, develop a 
general tort of invasion of privacy’ (at [133]).17
↵
Thus, both the judiciary and Parliament have long been averse to the idea of creating a privacy tort, for 
various reasons, including lack of precedent or a suitable definition of privacy, concerns about frivolous 
claims, the appropriate remedy (and whether any remedy could be effective, especially after the event) and 
concern about restraints on freedom of expression.
Counterpoint
In our view, none of these reasons are convincing. Lack of precedent does not prevent Parliament 
enacting legislation nor, in other areas, has it stopped the courts ‘creating law’ (see e.g. the tort in 
Wilkinson v Downton [1897] or the action under Rylands v Fletcher [1868]). Definition may be 
problematic, but it is not insurmountable. The 1972 Younger Committee report described privacy as 
‘privacy of information, that is the right to determine for oneself how and to what extent information 
about oneself is communicated to others’.18 This interpretation fits well with the majority of the cases 
we discuss shortly—perhaps indicating that defining privacy has never really been problematic or 
that a definition is in fact relatively unimportant.
The concern about frivolous claims surfaces each time a potential new harm is identified in tort. Yet 
the ‘floodgates’ that the judiciary seem so concerned to avoid opening do not seem to have opened in 
other jurisdictions and, given the personal and financial cost of bringing any legal claim (particularly 
as legal aid would not be available), few could bring so-called frivolous claims. If the courts are 
concerned that there will be more claims, this is a different issue—but more claims may simply reflect 
more invasions of privacy, which may indicate that those who continuously infringe individuals’ 
personal and private lives (e.g. the press) ought to be reined in by private law.
Remedies are more problematic. Most claimants wish to prevent information reaching, or to have 
information withdrawn from, the public sphere (e.g. in the form of an injunction prohibiting 
publication). Often it will be too late to do this. However, this difficulty is not used as a reason to deny 
remedies in other areas: for personal injuries caused by negligence there is no remedy that can give a 
claimant back a lost limb, yet the ‘appropriateness’ of the remedy, which must be monetary, does not 
prevent actionable claims. In any case, damages can be awarded in lieu of an injunction in appropriate 
cases.
Concerns about infringements on the right to freedom of expression are more valid. It is right in a 
democratic society that people, including the media, are free to form and speak their opinions. 
However, again (and as the cases discussed later show) the problem is not insurmountable: a 
balancing exercise is undertaken and in fact the development of this balancing exercise is what 
opened the door for the courts’ acknowledgement that a tort exists.
17
p. 451
18
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 7 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-16-2>.
16.3  How has privacy been protected?
As indicated earlier, the legislature, not wanting to be seen to be curbing the important right to freedom of 
expression, has long favoured self-regulation of the press.
16.3.1  Self-regulation
The Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee, in its 2007 report Self-Regulation of the Press, concluded that 
significant progress had been made to ensure the correct balance between protecting privacy and the right to 
publish—so much so that any statutory regulation would, in its view, ‘represent a very dangerous 
interference with the freedom of the press’, adding ‘[w]e continue to believe that statutory regulation of the 
press is a hallmark of authoritarianism and risks undermining democracy’.19 More authority was instead 
given to the Press Complaints Commission (PCC), an organisation that supposedly monitored British press 
adherence to ethical guidelines. The PCC was closed down in September 2014.20
Pause for reflection
The PCC marketed itself as ‘fast, free and fair’—its main advantage supposedly that it was quicker to 
achieve adjudication than through the court system. People who considered that their privacy had 
been violated by the print media could complain to the PCC, which could obtain a retraction and an 
apology, but could provide no further remedies.
Sara Cox, the radio DJ and TV presenter, complained to the PCC after a tabloid newspaper published 
long-range photographs of her sunbathing topless on a private beach on honeymoon. She 
complained that the photographs were taken when she was in a place where she had a reasonable 
expectation of privacy and were published in breach of her right to respect for her private life. 
Following adjudication by the PCC, the newspaper’s editor published a prominent apology and wrote 
privately to Ms Cox, but she sued anyway,21 later settling out of court.
Why did Sara Cox sue even after an apology was obtained? Once private photographs have been 
published, they cannot be retracted—is an apology enough? Do you think the fact that the newspaper 
settled out of court is an indication or an admission of wrongdoing?
As Sara Cox’s case illustrates, the PCC lacked ‘teeth’. Its board was composed mainly of press 
representatives, including editors of national newspapers—so it had a vested interest in what was and 
was not published.
p. 452
19
20
21
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 8 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
The Leveson Inquiry
The PCC’s ineffectiveness was something that vexed Lord Justice Leveson in his important inquiry 
into the culture, practices and ethics of the press in 2011–12.22 While not specifically concerned with 
privacy (it was ordered by then Prime Minister David Cameron in the wake of public outrage 
surrounding the newspaper phone-hacking scandal), many of the recommendations 
↵
from the 
2,000-page report have affected the law in some way and are likely to continue to do so.23 The 
recommendations included the following:
Dissolution of the PCC and the creation of a new, wholly independent regulatory body 
comprised of people with media experience but no serving editor, government minister or 
politician.
This body should create a Standards Code recognising the importance of freedom of speech 
and of publishing matters in the public interest, such as the exposure of serious impropriety or 
crime, particularly of public figures.
The Code should address the way individuals are treated by the press, especially regarding 
accuracy, avoiding misrepresentation of facts and maintaining appropriate respect for their 
privacy.
The body should be empowered to grant appropriate remedial action for breach of its 
standards, to direct the nature and placement of apologies/corrections and to impose 
sanctions including financial penalties (Leveson envisaged fines of up to 1 per cent of annual 
turnover up to a maximum of £1 million for serious systemic violations).
Legislation should ‘underpin’ the proposed system of self-regulation.
Welcoming the Leveson Report, David Cameron agreed that a new and independent regulator of the press, 
with a new code of standards, was required. However, he viewed using legislation to underpin this as 
‘crossing the Rubicon’ and political opinion on the matter was very much divided.24 The government 
nonetheless committed to implementing Leveson’s key recommendation: the media should regulate itself 
but there should be independent verification (or ‘recognition’) of those regulatory arrangements. The three 
major parties eventually reached agreement on establishing an independent regulator backed by Royal 
Charter.25 In November 2014 the Press Recognition Panel (PRP) was established to independently verify the 
media’s new self-regulatory body: the Independent Press Standards Organisation (IPSO).26
IPSO was established 8 September 2014, replacing the discredited PCC. More independent of media interests 
than the PCC, under the terms of its Editors’ Code of Practice it can deal with inaccurate reporting, invasion of 
privacy, intrusion into grief or shock and 
↵
harassment by the press.27 It has the power to obtain 
apologies and corrections, but may also issue fines in sufficiently serious cases.28
Clause 2 of IPSO’s Editors’ Code of Practice, the current version of which came into effect on 1 January 2025, 
says:
22
p. 453
23
24
25
26
p. 454
27
28
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 9 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
i)
ii)
iii)
2 *Privacy
Everyone is entitled to respect for their private and family life, home, physical and 
mental health, and correspondence, including digital communications.
Editors will be expected to justify intrusions into any individual’s private life without 
consent. In considering an individual’s reasonable expectation of privacy, account 
will be taken of the complainant’s own public disclosures of information and the 
extent to which the material complained about is already in the public domain or will 
become so.
It is unacceptable to photograph individuals, without their consent, in public or 
private places where there is a reasonable expectation of privacy.
The asterisk denotes a section of the Code from which IPSO allows derogation if it is in ‘the public interest’ to 
do so. This is defined at the end of the Code:
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 10 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
The Public Interest
The public interest includes, but is not confined to:
Detecting or exposing crime, or the threat of crime, or serious impropriety.
Protecting public health or safety.
Protecting the public from being misled by an action or statement of an 
individual or organisation.
Disclosing a person or organisation’s failure or likely failure to comply with any 
obligation to which they are subject.
Disclosing a miscarriage of justice.
Raising or contributing to a matter of public debate, including serious cases of 
impropriety, unethical conduct or incompetence concerning the public.
Disclosing concealment, or likely concealment, of any of the above.
There is a public interest in freedom of expression itself.
The regulator will consider the extent to which material is already in the public 
domain or will become so.
↵
 Editors invoking the public interest will need to demonstrate that they 
reasonably believed publication—or journalistic activity taken with a view to 
publication—would both serve, and be proportionate to, the public interest and 
explain how they reached that decision at the time.
An exceptional public interest would need to be demonstrated to over-ride the 
normally paramount interests of children under 16.
Pause for reflection
It is hard to establish how effective IPSO is, especially as some major news publishers have opted out 
of its system and it refuses to apply for recognition by the PRP. Further, in October 2016 another 
regulator—IMPRESS (the Independent Monitor for the Press)—was established in ‘opposition’ to 
IPSO, claiming to be ‘the first truly independent press regulator in the UK’. It has its own Standards 
Code, with different (broader) definitions of privacy and public interest, and is said to be ‘Leveson 
compliant’.29 As you read further, consider whether these Codes are likely to alter the way the press 
operates, especially given these internal disagreements.30
p. 455
29
30
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 11 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
Also consider the fact that Leveson paid little attention to the burgeoning sphere of social media, the 
development of which he viewed as ‘largely irrelevant to his considerations’ and not lending itself to 
regulation. What role do you think the expansion of social media has played in the privacy debate? 
Can the mainstream press be effectively regulated (and should it be) while others are free to post 
almost anything (subject to criminal law) online?31
Existing ‘boxes’ of liability (Kaye), as well as self-regulatory bodies, have had limited effect when an 
individual claims infringement of their privacy. However, the courts developed another route which offers 
greater protection of privacy: actions for breach of confidence.
16.3.2  Development of breach of confidence
Breach of confidence stems from equity and is designed to protect ‘secrets’ or confidential information. In 
Coco v AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd [1968], the duty was said to be breached when:
information exists which has ‘the necessary element of confidence about it’;
the defendant could be said to be obliged to keep the information confidential; and
‘unauthorised use’ of the information was made by the defendant.
↵
Thus, it can be used only when a duty of confidentiality is established. As it was primarily used to 
protect commercial secrets, it would initially appear to have little application to the type of privacy cases we 
are concerned with.32 Conventionally, a pre-existing relationship was required to bring about the duty. So, 
there would only be limited application in the context of personal secrets, for example in a marital 
relationship or between a party and someone taken into their confidence.
In Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2) [1990], a case relating to the publication of the 
controversial Spycatcher book, Lord Goff declared that a duty of confidentiality exists when:
confidential information comes to the knowledge of a person … in circumstances where he has notice 
or is held to have agreed that the information is confidential with the effect that it would be just in all 
the circumstances that he should be precluded from disclosing the information to others. (at 281, 
emphasis added)
Thus, a pre-existing relationship is not necessarily required. A duty will arise if a party gains information and 
knows (or ought to know) that they would be expected to keep it confidential. This has far broader 
implications for the protection of privacy, particularly in relation to press intrusion into people’s personal 
lives, as clearly illustrated by Venables v News Group Newspapers [2001] and X (A woman formerly known as 
Mary Bell) v SO [2003].33 In Venables an injunction was imposed contra mundum (against the whole world) to 
prevent disclosure of information that might reveal the identity or whereabouts of the killers (who had 
themselves been children at the time of the murder) of toddler Jamie Bulger. The justification for this was 
31
p. 456
32
33
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 12 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
that another right was at issue—the right to life of the claimant—who might suffer at the hands of members 
of the public if his identity was revealed.34 Similarly, in X, an injunction was imposed to prevent the 
publication of information that might identify Mary Bell (who had also killed children when she was a child 
herself) and also her own, now adult, daughter. More recently, a contra mundum injunction prohibiting 
publication of the new identities of a police informant and his relatives was granted, in order to protect their 
physical safety and right to life.35
Pause for reflection
Following these cases, do you think that what might make information confidential depends on how 
much harm would be caused to the parties concerned if the information was leaked? As you read 
through the chapter, think how a harm-based analysis fits with other cases decided in favour of the 
claimants. Do you think this is an appropriate test? Photographs of holidays or weddings being 
published without consent can be viewed as causing little or no real harm when compared to a risk to 
the right to life. But, on the other hand, it depends what we consider ‘harm’ to be—if the harm is the 
invasion of privacy itself then are all claimants in these cases equally deserving?
The defence to a breach of confidence claim is to show that disclosure of the information, though confidential 
in nature, is justified in the public interest. That is, the public interest in disclosure must be weighed against 
the interest of the claimant in maintaining confidentiality (Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 
2)).36
In Douglas, Zeta-Jones and Northern & Shell plc v Hello! Ltd [2005] breach of confidence essentially became a 
privacy action in all but name.
Douglas, Zeta-Jones and Northern & Shell plc v Hello! Ltd [2005] EWCA 
Civ 595 (CA)
The celebrity couple Michael Douglas and Catherine Zeta-Jones married in a New York hotel. They 
entered a £1 million contract with OK! magazine to publish exclusive photographs of the wedding and 
it was a term of the contract that the couple would have the final say regarding which photographs 
could be used. The wedding was otherwise private. Its location had not been made public and guests 
were asked not to bring cameras. Despite the security provided by the couple, a freelance 
photographer managed to get into the wedding and take covert pictures, which he then sold to rival 
magazine Hello! The couple sought and failed to achieve an interim injunction to prevent Hello! 
publishing the pictures, relying in part on breach of confidence and the new ‘privacy’ law (which they 
argued had been created by the HRA).
34
35
p. 457
36
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 13 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The court disagreed with the claimants’ submission that the HRA had created a new action in law on 
the basis that existing law was enough to protect people’s privacy interests. It found that there had 
been a breach of confidence, relying on Coco. It said that Hello! should clearly have realised that ‘an 
obligation of confidence’ existed in relation to the photographs (otherwise the photographer would 
not have had to obtain them secretly) and that there was no authority for their use, as it had been 
widely publicised that the wedding was to be a private event. The couple was awarded £14,500 
damages for interference with the remaining right of privacy they had after selling the photographic 
rights in the first place. (OK! magazine was also awarded more than £1 million for lost profit; this 
award was overturned by the Court of Appeal but later restored by the House of Lords in 2007.)
Pause for reflection
If hundreds of people were at the wedding anyway, and the photographs were to be sold to a 
publication that would be seen by millions, was this really a private affair? What made the 
unauthorised photographs an invasion of the claimants’ privacy, when they had already contracted to 
share their wedding day with the world? Does this case fit with the ‘harm’ analysis mentioned earlier? 
The claimants would presumably feel saddened to know that covert photography had taken place on 
their wedding day by someone seeking to make a profit—but is this harmful?
Do you agree with the decision? If not, is this because the couple had entered a contract that was 
designed for them to have control over which information (photographs) stayed private and which 
was made public?
The court in Douglas found that it did not matter that there were so many people at the wedding as everyone 
there knew it was private. So understood, the photographs, because of the design of the contract with OK!, 
were confidential precisely because of their commercial value. In effect, the Court of Appeal was simply 
applying the normal rules on breach of confidence. As in Kaye, the court made it clear that it was for 
Parliament to create a tort of invasion of privacy, not judges, who could only work with existing laws. 
However, because of the nature of the case—and who brought it—it was seen as establishing, even for people 
in the public eye, a (limited) right to privacy.
Breach of confidence resurfaced again in ABC and others v Telegraph Media Group Ltd [2018]. In this 
controversial case, the Court of Appeal granted an interim injunction to the claimants (one a prominent 
businessman) in relation to allegations made by five previous employees about his ‘discreditable conduct’. A 
journalist had approached the claimants, informing them that details of the allegations were to be published, 
including the fact that the complainants had all signed non-disclosure agreements (NDAs), for which they 
had received substantial monetary payments. The claimants (two companies and the businessman 
concerned) immediately sought an injunction preventing them from being named, or information about the 
p. 458
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 14 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
allegations or NDAs being published. The Court of Appeal (overturning an earlier judgment of the High 
Court) found that an interim injunction should be granted, as the information carried the necessary degree of 
confidence. It recognised the importance of protecting duties of confidence and was not persuaded that the 
‘public interest in publication outweighs the confidentiality attaching to the information pending a speedy 
trial’ (at [31]). The Court of Appeal essentially made it clear that this was not a test of whether the 
information was in the public interest, but whether it is in the public interest that the duty of confidence 
should be breached. The case was later discontinued by the claimants in February 2019, reportedly leaving 
them with a £3 million legal bill. This also meant that the Court of Appeal’s injunction was discharged, and 
the Daily Telegraph immediately published its allegations that the businessman concerned was Sir Philip 
Green (owner of Topshop/Topman stores, among others), and had subjected five individuals to racial, 
physical and sexual abuse and other bullying behaviour.37
Pause for reflection
The ABC decision had meant that an interim injunction would be in place—until the point of a full trial 
that would decide whether a permanent injunction should be granted. This meant that the 
information may still have come to light, after a proper trial of the facts, which the Court of Appeal 
had ordered to be expedited in recognition of the undesirability of delay in the publication of matters 
of potential public interest. However, the Court of Appeal’s decision was overtaken by the actions of 
Lord Hain who, exercising parliamentary privilege, named Sir Philip Green in the House of Lords in 
October 2018, undoubtedly leading to the claimants’ later discontinuation of the case.
Notwithstanding the rights and wrongs of naming the claimant at that stage in the proceedings, the 
case should make us think. Presumably, there is a public interest in the disclosure of multiple 
allegations of sexual harassment, bullying and racial abuse by a senior executive who then paid large 
sums to prevent victim-survivors telling their stories publicly. The use of NDAs in this respect should 
give us cause for concern.38 Strong criticism was voiced against them by The Telegraph in response to 
the judgment. Though this was not unexpected, given that it was the defendant in this case (and had 
spent eight months researching the story), the criticism referred to concerns about NDAs being used 
to cover up potential wrongdoing, particularly by powerful individuals, saying it would ‘reignite the 
#MeToo movement against the mistreatment of women, minorities and others by powerful 
employers’. Maria Miller MP, then chair of the House of Commons’ Women and Equality Committee, 
said it was ‘shocking’ that NDAs were being used to gag victims and that they should not be used 
‘where there are accusations of sexual misconduct and wider bullying’.39
Linklaters LLP and another v Mellish [2019] concerned the issue of how large ‘Magic Circle’ law firms 
deal with workplace sexual harassment. Mellish, who had left Linklaters after a short period of 
employment, emailed the senior partners announcing that he intended to share his ‘impressions of 
the current culture at Linklaters’, especially ‘the ongoing struggle Linklaters has with women in the 
workplace’. He highlighted three incidents in particular, saying he would go on record about how the 
37
p. 459
38
39
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 15 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
company had handled them. Mr Justice Warby, granting an interim injunction, ruled Linklaters had a 
‘legitimate interest’ in maintaining confidentiality over such matters, and that this outweighed the 
public interest in the conduct of large firms. Commenting on the decision, Richard Moorhead says:
He [Warby J] does not consider the possibility that stifling a discussion of firm culture is 
more likely to inhibit the coming forward of complainants. Judges need to think more 
carefully if protecting the reputation of men, whilst claiming to protect the interests of 
women.40
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-16-3>.
16.4  A new tort: ‘Misuse of private information’
Douglas opened the door for other privacy claims, most involving high-profile claimants. The major turning 
point—and the genesis of a new tort—came when supermodel Naomi Campbell tried to suppress publication 
of details of her rehabilitation from drug addiction.
Campbell v Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN) [2004] UKHL 22 (HL)
The Daily Mirror published stories about Naomi Campbell seeking treatment for drug addiction. On 
one occasion it published a photograph showing her leaving a Narcotics Anonymous meeting in 
London and details about what her treatment might entail. Having tried and failed to sue for invasion 
of privacy, Campbell framed her action as a claim for breach of confidence, arguing that any 
‘reasonable person’ would realise that details of her treatment and where this was taking place were 
clearly confidential.
A bare majority of the House of Lords upheld her claim—in part. Because she had previously denied 
having a drugs problem, despite acknowledging that many models did take drugs, the law lords held 
that the story detailing the fact that she did in fact use illegal drugs, and was attending Narcotics 
Anonymous for help in overcoming this problem, could be published, as this was correcting an 
inaccurate image she had portrayed of herself. However, they went on to hold that the details of her 
treatment as well as the photograph of her leaving the meeting could not be published. Medical 
information is always a confidential matter, and publishing the photograph may allow people to 
discover where her treatment was taking place. Both things, if published, could have negative effects 
on the treatment itself.
40
p. 460
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 16 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
Campbell is significant.41 In Campbell, their lordships clarified the relationship between breach of confidence 
and invasion of privacy. Lord Nicholls (dissenting), while accepting that the nature of breach of confidence 
had changed once the pre-existing relationship requirement was removed, maintained that there was ‘no 
over-arching, all-embracing cause of action for “invasion of privacy” ’ (at [11]). However, he acknowledged 
that developments in the law, particularly regarding breach of confidence, had been prompted by the HRA 
and that because the duty of confidence now arose where ‘a person receives information he knows or ought 
to know is fairly and reasonably to be regarded as confidential’ this had in 
↵
essence created a tort of 
‘misuse of private information’ (at [14]). Furthermore, the HRA, plus European Court of Human Rights 
(ECtHR) jurisprudence, prompted him to acknowledge that ‘the values enshrined in Articles 8 and 10 [ECHR] 
are now part of the cause of action for breach of confidence’ (at [17]). Thus, future cases—now understood as 
‘misuse of private information’ claims—would need to concentrate more on confidential/private information 
and the balance of the claimant’s right to private, home and family life (Art 8 ECHR) against the defendant’s 
right to freedom of expression (Art 10 ECHR).
That there is a tort of misuse of private information was confirmed by the High Court in Vidal-Hall and others 
v Google Inc [2014] in the context of Google’s misuse of personal data obtained via the Safari browser. 
Tugendhat J cited Lord Nicholls in Douglas and others v Hello! Ltd and others [2007] as authority that ‘breach 
of confidence, or misuse of confidential information, now covers two distinct causes of action, protecting two 
different interests: privacy, and secret (“confidential”) information’ (at [255]). He concluded that a distinct 
‘tort of misuse of private information’ exists (at [70]). This was upheld by the Court of Appeal in Google Inc v 
Vidal-Hall and others [2015]. Also in 2014—though this part of the claim was ultimately unsuccessful—it was 
considered a tort by the Court of Appeal in OPO v MLA [2014], where a child sought to prevent publication of 
his father’s (a successful musician and public figure) autobiography.42 The Supreme Court confirmed the tort 
in PJS v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2016].
Since Campbell, a two-stage test is used to determine whether ‘misuse of private information’ has occurred.43 
The test is as follows.
Did the claimant have a ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’ regarding the information? If so,
Does their interest in maintaining their right to privacy outweigh the defendant’s interest in freedom 
of expression (i.e. the ability to publish the information)?
This inevitably leaves us with a question: what is a reasonable expectation of privacy?
16.4.1  What is a ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’?
In Campbell, it was held that a reasonable expectation of privacy would arise when it was ‘obvious’ that the 
information being disclosed was private.44 While the majority of the law lords thought that information 
about treatment for drug addiction was obviously private, they did not think the same of the photograph, as 
this was taken on a public street.
41
p. 461
42
43 
44
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 17 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
Lord Nicholls (dissenting in Campbell) argued that treatment for addiction at Narcotics Anonymous 
followed a well-known pattern and as such the disclosure of information about this was no more 
significant than ‘saying a person who has fractured a limb has his limb in plaster or that a person 
suffering from cancer is undergoing a course of chemotherapy’ (at [26]).
Do you agree? Or does the fact that drug addiction relates to a person’s mental wellbeing and is 
associated with judgements that can be made about their personality and private life, as well as their 
physical health, distinguish the two examples?
A secondary test was proposed for situations—like the photo—where it is not ‘obvious’ that information was 
private. Then, we must ask whether disclosure of the information would cause offence to a ‘person of 
ordinary sensibilities’ if it was about them.45 This is a fairly bizarre subjective–objective test, particularly as 
the courts must put themselves into the minds of a ‘person of ordinary sensibilities’ in the same situation as 
the claimant—often situations that are unlikely to happen to most ‘ordinary people’. Because on this 
secondary test it could be harmful to Naomi Campbell’s treatment of and recovery from addiction to publish a 
photograph from which the location of her treatment could be identified, publication was prevented. In other 
words, because to publish a photograph which could enable people to find out where an obviously private 
medical treatment was taking place might cause offence to ‘a person of ordinary sensibilities’, she could also 
establish a ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’ in relation to the photographs. As Baroness Hale noted, it 
would have been different if Campbell was merely ‘going about her business in a private street’ because:
she makes a substantial part of her living out of being photographed looking stunning in designer 
clothing. Readers will obviously be interested to see how she looks if and when she pops out to the 
shops for a bottle of milk. (at [154])
Pause for reflection
Look again at Kaye. If the same events happened today, would the case be decided differently? The 
images of him in hospital would have a ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’ attached (as photographs 
of a person in hospital, unable to give their consent, can easily be considered ‘obviously’ private) and 
it would be unlikely that the photographs of him would be in the public interest, even if the public was 
interested in the fact that he had been injured. The question is about where the line should be drawn 
about what information the public should be given about the private lives of others.
p. 462
45
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 18 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Compare Elton John v Associated Newspapers [2006], where Sir Elton John complained that a picture taken of 
him walking away from his car with his driver was an invasion of privacy. 
↵
The court found that the 
picture contained no obviously private information and was merely a snapshot of him going about his 
ordinary life. Similarly, in Serafin v Malkiewicz and others [2017] a photograph of the claimant (who was 
engaged in a more detailed defamation claim and argued that the photograph showed him in a negative light) 
gesticulating with two fingers was found to be ‘no big deal’ in the modern age (at [351]) and did not engage a 
reasonable expectation of privacy.46
A ‘reasonable expectation’ of privacy will, therefore, generally be quite ‘obvious’.47 The test was confirmed by 
the Court of Appeal in Murray (discussed later) to be:
a broad one, which takes account of all the circumstances of the case. They include the attributes of 
the claimant, the nature of the activity in which the claimant was engaged, the places at which it was 
happening, the nature and purpose of the intrusion, the absence of consent and whether it was 
known or could be inferred, the effect on the claimant and the circumstances in which and the 
purposes for which the information came into the hands of the publisher. (at [36])
In Middleton and another v Person or Persons Unknown [2016], Pippa Middleton (sister of Catherine, Princess of 
Wales), was granted an injunction preventing publication of some 3,000 photographs stolen from her iCloud 
account. In Ali and another v Channel 5 Broadcast Ltd [2018], the claimants were found to have a reasonable 
expectation of privacy in relation to the filming and broadcast of their eviction from their privately rented 
home on the TV programme Can’t Pay? We’ll Take it Away.48 In contrast, it seems that sending private emails 
from a work account will not always attract a reasonable expectation of privacy.49 In Stoute & Stoute v News 
Group Newspapers [2023] the Court of Appeal confirmed that ‘case law recognises that photographs require 
special consideration’ because they are uniquely ‘private’ and vulnerable to misuse (at [35]).50 In terms of 
considering ‘all the circumstances of the case’, LCG and others v OVD and others [2023] confirms that the 
‘Murray factors’ are not exhaustive and ‘other relevant factors would also include the content of the pictures, 
the circumstances in which they were created and held, and how and why any claimant had and asserted an 
entitlement to prevent or control their accessibility’ (at [16]).
That said, there are several types of case that can be grouped together to see whether general principles in 
respect of a reasonable expectation of privacy arise, including where claimants are under investigation, where 
the information is of a sexual or intimate nature, where children are involved or where there is iniquity on the 
part of the claimant.
16.4.1.1  Subjects of investigations
Being the subject of a police investigation appears to attract a reasonable expectation of privacy.51 This was 
reiterated in Richard v BBC and another [2018], even once the information (about investigations being 
conducted into historic child sex abuse allegations under 
↵
Operation Yewtree) had come into the hands 
of the media. Likewise, in XKF v BBC [2018] the claimant, an ex-police officer who had been imprisoned for 
corruption, successfully prevented the BBC from showing an interview with him on its Panorama 
programme. Though there might not be a reasonable expectation of privacy in relation to his initial conviction 
p. 463
46
47
48
49
50
51
p. 464
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 19 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(even though it was by then spent), there was in respect of his rehabilitation (including his change of 
identity).52 In ZXC v Bloomberg [2022] the Supreme Court confirmed that ‘as a legitimate starting point, a 
person under a criminal investigation has, prior to being charged, a reasonable expectation of privacy in 
respect of information relating to that investigation’ (at [146]). In contrast, no reasonable expectation of 
privacy was found in Axon v Ministry of Defence [2016] in the context of leaks to a national newspaper about a 
former Royal Navy commanding officer who had been removed from command following allegations of 
bullying.
16.4.1.2  Intimate or sexual information
In Elizabeth Jagger v John Darling [2005], Elizabeth Jagger (the daughter of Mick Jagger) obtained an 
injunction preventing the publication of pictures and CCTV footage of her and Calum Best (the son of 
footballer George Best) engaged in ‘sexual activities’ in the doorway of a nightclub. Mr Justice Bell found that 
she had a reasonable expectation of privacy as, although in a public space, she was unaware of being 
observed. In Mosley v NGN [2008], it was confirmed that one’s sexual activities are generally to be considered 
private.
Mosley v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2008] EWHC 1777 (QB)
The late Max Mosley, son of 1930s British Fascist leader Sir Oswald Mosley, and the then head of the 
International Automobile Federation (FIA), was covertly filmed by the News of the World with five 
prostitutes in a London basement flat. The now defunct newspaper described a ‘sick Nazi orgy’ and a 
‘truly grotesque and depraved’ event, posting the film on its website and alleging that Mosley had 
assumed the role of a concentration camp commandant, saying: ‘In public he rejects his father’s evil 
past but secretly he plays Nazi sex games’.53 The film was viewed by 
↵
3.5 million people. In court, 
Mosley admitted involvement in sadomasochistic extramarital sex, but denied the link to Nazism. Mr 
Justice Eady ruled that Mosley had a reasonable expectation of privacy in relation to his sexual 
activities, though unconventional, if they took place between consenting adults on private property 
(at [232]). He said that the authorities tend to show that ‘people’s sex lives are to be regarded as 
essentially their own business—provided at least that the participants are genuinely consenting 
adults and there is no question of exploiting the young or vulnerable’ (at [100]).54 Given that the link 
to Nazism was not proved, Mr Justice Eady further concluded that there was:
no public interest or other justification for the clandestine recording, for the publication of 
the resulting information and still photographs, or for the placing of the video extracts on 
the News of the World website—all of this on a massive scale. Of course, I accept that such 
behaviour is viewed by some people with distaste and moral disapproval, but in the light of 
modern rights-based jurisprudence that does not provide any justification for the intrusion 
on the personal privacy of the claimant. (at [233])
52
53
p. 465
54
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 20 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Notably, Eady J stressed that this was not a ‘landmark’ decision (at [234]), but one that applied 
‘recently developed but established principles’ to an unusual set of facts.55
That private intimate relationships attract a reasonable expectation of privacy was restated in AMC and 
another v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2015], a case about an affair conducted by a ‘prominent and successful 
professional sportsman, who has, from time to time held positions of responsibility in his sport’ (at [6]).56 In 
Wan-Bissaka and another v Bentley [2020] the Premiership footballer succeeded in a claim against his former 
partner to prevent her disclosing details of their relationship, including text conversations. The principle 
holds in a non-celebrity context too: ZYT and another v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2015] and Bull v Desporte 
[2019].
When there is already some public awareness of the information, a ‘reasonable expectation’ of privacy may be 
lost. In Theakston v MGN Ltd [2002], for example, an attempt by a radio and television presenter to prevent 
publication of information about his visit to a brothel failed due to knowledge of the event already being in 
the public domain.57 However, what is considered to be in the public domain is a fine line—for example, Ned 
Rocknroll (now known as Edward Abel Smith, the husband of actress Kate Winslet and nephew of Virgin’s Sir 
Richard Branson) succeeded in preventing a national newspaper publishing 
↵
partially naked 
photographs of him, despite them having been visible for some time on his friend’s Facebook page.58 In PJS 
[2016] a majority of the Supreme Court—somewhat controversially—upheld an injunction preventing 
publication of the names of a celebrity and his partner allegedly involved in an extramarital threesome, 
despite widespread knowledge of who the celebrity might be following publication of the information outside 
the jurisdiction and on social media.59
16.4.1.3  Children
The Court of Appeal in Murray v Express Newspapers plc [2008] considered the approach to be taken in 
relation to children.
Murray v Express Newspapers plc [2008] EWCA Civ 446 (CA)
JK Rowling, the author of the Harry Potter books, claimed on behalf of her then 18-month-old son 
David, after a long-lens photograph of him in his pushchair was published in 2004. Rowling (whose 
married name is Murray), sought damages for the infringement of David’s right to privacy as well as 
an injunction to prevent further publication of similar pictures. Her case failed in the High Court. Mr 
Justice Patten said that the law did not provide for a ‘press-free zone’ (at [66]) for celebrities and their 
children in respect of everything that they do, adding that ‘an area of routine activity which, when 
conducted in a public place, carries no guarantee of privacy’.
55
56
57
p. 466
58
59
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 21 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The Court of Appeal overturned the decision, finding that David had a legitimate expectation of 
privacy, even while on a public street.
Interestingly, Express Newspapers settled out of court when the claim was still at the High Court—the action 
survived only against the picture agency that took and supplied the photographs to the newspaper. Giving the 
judgment of the Court of Appeal, Sir Anthony Clarke said:
As we see it, the question whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy is a broad one, which 
takes account of all the circumstances of the case. They include the attributes of the claimant, the 
nature of the activity in which the claimant was engaged, the place at which it was happening, the 
nature and purpose of the intrusion, the absence of consent and whether it was known or could be 
inferred, the effect on the claimant and the circumstances in which and the purposes for which the 
information came into the hands of the publisher. (at [36])
This interpretation allowed the court to find that the High Court judge had not given enough consideration to 
the fact that the claimant was a child. Sir Anthony Clarke found that:
if a child of parents who are not in the public eye could reasonably expect not to have photographs of 
him published in the media, so too should the child of a famous parent. In our 
↵
opinion, it is at 
least arguable that a child of ‘ordinary’ parents could reasonably expect that the press would not 
target him and publish photographs of him. The same is true of David, especially since on the alleged 
facts here the photograph would not have been taken or published if he had not been the son of JK 
Rowling. (at [46])
Murray suggested that there will always be a legitimate expectation of privacy if you are the (young) child of a 
famous person, because you cannot be said to have sought celebrity status for yourself.60 This argument was 
used in AAA v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2013], where pictures of the infant child claimant were published 
alongside claims that her father was a famous (even perhaps notorious) politician. The claim was ultimately 
unsuccessful, largely due to the mother’s inconsistent approach to the level of privacy to be afforded the 
information; it also raised a matter of general public interest. While children’s interests do not have 
automatic precedence over others, not only should their best interests be considered, but courts should also 
accord particular weight to the Article 8 rights of any children likely to be affected by a publication, a 
principle confirmed by the Court of Appeal in ETK v Newsgroup Newspapers [2011].61 Weller and others v 
Associated Newspapers Ltd [2015] confirmed that children may have different expectations regarding their 
privacy when compared to adults and that these expectations could, in fact, be affected by the actions of the 
parents, as had been the case in AAA.62 In PJS [2016], the Supreme Court found that the Court of Appeal had 
failed to adequately consider the impact that the publication of the information would have on PJS’s 
children.63 The principles are, however, not confined to the children of celebrities.64
p. 467
60
61
62
63
64
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 22 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Whether celebrity parents are equally deserving of protection from being photographed going about their 
ordinary lives is more debatable. Some people feel strongly about this, arguing that if you become famous, 
you should expect what comes with the territory. As Lady Hale reminded us in Campbell, many people are 
interested in what celebrities look like when they pop to the shops for a pint of milk. With regard to adults, it 
has seemed that only when to publish photographs or news stories might cause tangible harm does the 
question of protecting privacy seem to arise.65 This appears to include harm to the wider family unit, 
particularly where children are involved.66 Ward LJ in ETK v Newsgroup Newspapers [2011] 
↵
confirmed 
this in the context of a claim to protect information about an adulterous affair between two ‘entertainment 
industry’ personalities from being made public (at [22]).67 He was prepared to protect their identities because 
children were involved and because:
there is no political edge to the publication. The organisation of the economic, social and political life 
of the country, so crucial to democracy, is not enhanced by publication. The intellectual, artistic or 
personal development of members of society is not stunted by ignorance of the sexual frolics of 
figures known to the public … (at [21])
16.4.1.4  Iniquity
When the claimant has done something they shouldn’t (e.g. something illegal) this may justify publication of 
information which may otherwise seem to be an invasion of privacy.68 Jagger, Contostavlos, Mosley and PJS 
show that adult sexual activity—even extramarital—is generally considered private.69 Cases involving 
anonymity orders and so-called ‘super-injunctions’70—in particular in relation to the sexual activities of 
famous people—support the idea that the public’s interest (as opposed to public interest) will not always be 
enough to warrant publication of such stories (or even the names of the individuals concerned): something 
more is required.71 The idea of exposing iniquity may also have to be balanced against the risk of intrusion 
and harassment.72
In John Terry v Persons Unknown [2010], this ‘something more’ was the public interest in exposing the affair 
the claimant was having with his team-mate’s girlfriend, particularly 
↵
when he was seen as a ‘role 
model’.73 Terry’s counsel argued, relying on an interpretation of Mosley, that private conduct must have been 
unlawful before it was able to be publicly criticised, but this was rejected.74 In Hutcheson (Formerly Known As 
‘KGM’) v News Group Newspapers Ltd and others [2011], Gross LJ found that information about chef Gordon 
Ramsay’s father-in-law and business colleague was publishable ‘in the public interest’ where both family and 
commercial matters were intertwined. Hutcheson had for years maintained a secret second family—one issue 
was whether he had inappropriately used Ramsay company money to fund the second family and that this, 
apparently, was one of the reasons his employment had been terminated.
In contrast, the Court of Appeal granted anonymity to ‘a well known sportsman’ (at [7]), though not an 
injunction protecting the disclosure of certain facts about his infidelities (JIH v NGN Ltd [2011]).75 Lord 
Neuberger, giving the judgment of the court, said:
65
66
p. 468
67
68
69
70
71
72
p. 469
73
74
75
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 23 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
There is obvious force in the contention that the public interest would be better served by 
publication of the fact that the court has granted an injunction to an anonymous well known 
sportsman … than by being told it has granted an injunction to an identified person to restrain 
publication of unspecified information of an allegedly private nature. (at [33])
In JIH the Court of Appeal was apparently swayed that an injunction granting anonymity would better 
balance the claimant’s and public’s interests because information was already in the public domain relating 
to an earlier, similar story about the claimant. Lord Neuberger said that if his identity but not the information 
was disclosed, the public and the media would easily be able to work out what information the injunction was 
designed to protect, thus defeating its purpose—it would be a ‘classic, if not very difficult, jigsaw exercise’ (at 
[40]).
Pause for reflection
The Supreme Court has found that the right of freedom of expression in relation to legal proceedings 
means to be able to report them, providing that the reporting is fair and accurate. From Re Guardian 
News and Media Ltd [2010], that right includes being able to name those involved rather than simply 
referring to anonymous people in a disembodied way.76 Lord Rodger said: ‘if newspapers can identify 
the people concerned they may be able to give a more vivid and compelling account which will 
stimulate discussion … Concealing identities simply casts a shadow over entire communities’ (at 
[65]).
↵
In CDE v MGN Ltd [2010] Eady J considered a case brought by a married man who ‘often appears 
on television’ and his wife, seeking to protect their family from the revelation of a ‘virtual’ (i.e. via text 
message, email, etc) affair he had briefly conducted with another woman (the second defendant in 
this case—who had been persuaded by a journalist to sell her story to the Sunday Mirror). The 
claimants had always, it was found, ‘guarded their private lives closely’ and ‘never sought publicity’.77 
They were granted anonymity, though this was also extended to several individuals not actually party 
to the case, including the couple’s teenage children, the child of the second defendant and one of the 
journalists on the defendant newspaper, the second defendant’s solicitor and her ‘publicity advisor’! Is 
this taking anonymity too far?
Concealing one or other feature of a case may, however, be more favourable in the interests of ‘open 
justice’ than the granting of ‘super-injunctions’.78 Surely allowing the press to publish something is 
preferable to restrictions on publishing anything?79 This was addressed by a committee chaired by 
Lord Neuberger MR which considered the use of super-injunctions (as well as interim injunctions 
and anonymity orders) in the wake of concerns expressed in Parliament, the media, the courts and by 
the public following the Trafigura80 and John Terry super-injunctions.81 It recommended that:
76
p. 470
77 
78
79
80
81
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 24 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
exceptions to the principle of open justice will only be allowed when they are strictly 
necessary in the interests of justice, and that when allowed they will go no further than is 
strictly necessary. This should mean that super-injunctions will only be granted in very 
limited circumstances and, at least normally, for very short periods of time. (p ii)
Further, any derogations from the principles of open justice would have to be justified by the claimant 
and it was envisaged that this would be ‘a heavy burden’.82 That said, in February 2017, reports 
emerged of a new super-injunction, preventing publication of any information which might lead to 
the identity of the celebrity involved, including their gender and what they are famous for.83 The 
Sunday Times reported that it had initiated legal proceedings. Nevertheless, the identity of the 
celebrity concerned was leaked by overseas media outlets.84
16.4.2  Does the claimant’s interest in maintaining their right to privacy out­
weigh the defendant’s interest in freedom of expression?
Once reasonable expectation of privacy is established, the second part of the test asks whether the claimant’s 
interest in maintaining their right to privacy outweighs the defendant’s interest in freedom of expression (i.e. 
the ability to publish the information). In Jagger, Bell J said there was ‘no legitimate public interest in further 
dissemination of the images which could serve only to humiliate the claimant for the prurient interests of 
others’ (at [14]).85 Similarly, in ABK v KDT and another [2013], in the context of a ‘revenge porn’ harassment 
claim, the female claimant was granted an injunction in respect of personal photographs and information 
held (and threatened to be disclosed to friends, family and her employer) by the defendant, with whom she 
had had an extramarital affair. In AJS v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2017], Nicol J granted an injunction to 
prevent The Sun newspaper from naming a famous individual (AJS), a witness in a serious police 
investigation into allegations of a ‘serious criminal offence’ that took place at AJS’s home in February 2017,86 
finding there to be no public interest in publishing AJS’s private details.
In ZXC v Bloomberg LP [2020], the Court of Appeal upheld a decision preventing the publication of 
confidential information obtained from a law enforcement agency investigating the activities of a 
businessman. Giving judgment for the Court of Appeal, Simon LJ said:
I would take the opportunity to make clear that those who have simply come under suspicion by an 
organ of the state have, in general, a reasonable and objectively founded expectation of privacy in 
relation to that fact and an expressed basis for that suspicion. The suspicion may ultimately be 
shown to be well-founded or ill-founded, but until that point the law should recognise the human 
characteristic to assume the worst (that there is no smoke without fire); and to overlook the 
fundamental legal principle that those who are accused of an offence are deemed to be innocent until 
they are proven guilty. (at [82])
82
83
84
p. 471
85
86 
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 25 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(a)
(i)
(ii)
(b)
In what proved to be a defining case in this contentious area, an appeal by Bloomberg to the Supreme Court 
was dismissed.87 This confirms the approach that, as a matter of general principle, investigations by law 
enforcement agencies may only be reported where there is a proven public interest justification.88
Essentially this becomes a battle between privacy and freedom of expression: these concepts must be 
balanced to determine the outcome. The following section explores the way misuse of private information 
claims have developed, as affected by human rights considerations.
16.4.3  The Human Rights Act 1998 and European case law
Lord Irvine (then the Lord Chancellor) said, during parliamentary debate on the Human Rights Bill, that:
judges are pen-poised regardless of the incorporation of the Convention to develop a right of privacy 
to be protected by the common law … it will be a better law if the judges develop it after 
incorporation because they will have regards to Articles 8 and 10, giving Article 10 its due high value 
… I believe that the true view is that the courts will be able to adapt and develop the existing 
domestic principles in the laws of trespass, nuisance, copyright, confidence and the like to fashion a 
common law right to privacy.89
Human Rights Act 1998, s 12(4)
The court must have particular regard to the importance of the Convention right to freedom 
of expression and, where the proceedings relate to material which the respondent claims, or 
which appears to the court, to be journalistic, literary or artistic material (or to conduct 
connected with such material), to—
the extent to which—
the material has, or is about to, become available to the public; or
it is, or would be, in the public interest for the material to be published;
any relevant privacy code.
Section 12(4) of the HRA requires courts to undertake a balancing exercise when considering the competing 
rights from Articles 8 and 10 ECHR. Section 12 is, however, headed ‘freedom of expression’ and applies when 
‘a court is considering whether to grant any relief which, if granted, might affect the exercise of the 
Convention right to freedom of expression’ (s 12(1)). Clearly, granting someone a remedy for infringement of 
their privacy (e.g. by the press) may have an effect on freedom of expression. Section 12 appears to prioritise 
this freedom above the right to privacy, by assigning it special status.90 However, later cases tell us that the 
two rights are to be treated equally.91
87
88
p. 472
89
90
91
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 26 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Section 6(1) of the HRA makes it ‘unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is incompatible with a 
Convention right’. Courts and tribunals are ‘public authorities’ (s 6(3)), as is ‘any person certain of whose 
functions are functions of a public nature’, which may include organisations such as IPSO and Ofcom. 
Furthermore, section 7 of the HRA allows individuals to bring proceedings in domestic courts against any 
public authority that has acted in contravention of a Convention right. This means that citizens may claim in 
domestic courts that their right to private and family life, granted by Article 8(1) ECHR, has been infringed by 
a public authority or other who falls within the definition in section 6. However, 
↵
when proceedings 
relate to ‘journalistic, literary or artistic material’ (i.e. information about someone’s private life being 
published in some way),92 section 12 comes into play, and the court must weigh up whether giving relief for 
the invasion of privacy would unjustifiably impact on freedom of expression.
Pause for reflection
In Wainwright Lord Hoffmann, referring to ECtHR jurisprudence, remained unconvinced that a 
general privacy principle was required. Instead, he said, domestic courts could provide an adequate 
remedy for invasions of privacy made contrary to Article 8 ECHR. In this context, he described 
sections 6 and 7 of the HRA as ‘substantial gap fillers’ (at [34]), suggesting that in conjunction with 
Article 8(1) the job of protecting privacy could be done adequately, without the need to create a free- 
standing tort.
He concluded his speech saying that:
a finding that there was a breach of Article 8 will only demonstrate that there was a gap in 
the English remedies for invasion of privacy which has since been filled by sections 6 and 7 
of the 1998 Act. It does not require that the courts should provide an alternative remedy 
which distorts the principles of the common law. (at [52])
Lord Hoffmann seems to suggest that invasion of privacy is a harm that has always been recognised 
—but that the law had not always provided suitable remedies when the harm occurred, and it is this 
remedial gap that was filled by the HRA. Do you agree? Consider cases decided since the coming into 
force of the Act—have the decisions become any easier for judges to make? Are they making the right 
decisions and providing the right remedies for the right claimants?
Check our pointers <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-  
resources/horsey9e-chapter-16-pointers-to-pause-for-reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes? 
options=showName> on how to answer the questions posed in this ‘pause for reflection’.
p. 473
92
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 27 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The most notable ECtHR decision in the context of evolving judicial attitudes to privacy came in Von 
Hannover v Germany [2004]. This judgment was handed down a short time after Campbell and remains 
influential in determining how judges should balance Article 8 and 10 rights.
Von Hannover v Germany (App No 59320/00) [2004] EMLR 21 (ECtHR)
Princess Caroline of Monaco alleged that media intrusions into her daily routine violated her rights 
under Article 8. Princess Caroline has celebrity status in much of Europe—she is the daughter of the 
late Prince Rainier III of Monaco and his wife, the late American film actress Grace Kelly, and was the 
presumptive heir to the throne of Monaco. She claimed that paparazzi photographs of her 
undertaking daily activities, including some which showed her children, were an invasion of her right 
to private, home and family life. She had previously claimed in the 
↵
German courts, but had failed 
on the grounds that, as a public figure par excellence, she should expect members of the public to take 
an interest in her daily life.
The ECtHR upheld her claim, holding that the key issue when weighing up the rights under Articles 8 
and 10 was to ask how far the information being published would be in the ‘public interest’, which the 
judges found was different from what the public might genuinely be interested in. They also 
distinguished between Princess Caroline’s public functions and private life. Clearly, they said, when 
performing or attending a public function, there would be a legitimate public interest in pictures of 
her being published but, when going about her private life, she had a ‘reasonable expectation’ of 
privacy.93
Both the Article 8(1) ECHR right to private and family life, home and correspondence and the Article 10(1) 
ECHR right to freedom of expression are ‘qualified’ rights, meaning that while they must be protected by the 
state, certain things (listed in Arts 10(2) and 8(2), respectively) are considered legitimate infringements of a 
person’s exercise of that right. Among other things, Article 10(2) states that the right to freedom of 
expression may be curtailed in the public interest (e.g. in the interests of national security) or where other, 
competing, individual rights are at stake (e.g. the right of people to protect their reputations or to prevent the 
disclosure of information given in confidence). So, at the outset, neither right is absolute. Each right 
impinges on the other, particularly in the context of claims about media invasions of privacy. The media, as 
part of a democratic society, has a vital role to play in disseminating information. The question is how far the 
press can go—especially into someone’s ‘private’ affairs—before they are deemed to have gone ‘too far’.94
Pause for reflection
What does ‘private and family life’ encompass? In Niemietz v Germany [1993] the ECtHR deemed it 
neither ‘possible nor necessary to’ attempt an exhaustive definition (at [29]). The Court added:
p. 474
93
94
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 28 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
However, it would be too restrictive to limit the notion to an ‘inner circle’ in which the 
individual may live his own personal life as he chooses and to exclude therefrom entirely 
↵
the outside world not encompassed within that circle. Respect for private life must also 
comprise to a certain degree the right to establish and develop relationships with other 
human beings.
Thus, it seems that one’s ‘inner circle’, at least, may be protected, as well as—to a degree—one’s 
relationships with others, but each case will be decided on its own facts.
How far do you think one’s private and family life extends? Is this the same for ordinary citizens and 
for celebrities? Clearly there is no right or wrong answer to this—people have their own perceptions 
about how far celebrities open themselves up to invasions of privacy. It is likely that there is a 
‘spectrum’ of private information: ranging from the very private (e.g. an evening spent at home with 
one’s young children) to less private (e.g. being seen at a public event). But celebrity lifestyles make 
for difficult cases. For instance, where on the spectrum would a celebrity’s wedding sit if the kind of 
measures Michael Douglas and Catherine Zeta-Jones took to try and keep it private were not used? 
What about Prince Harry and Meghan Markle’s private lives, after the televised interview on Oprah 
and the publication of Prince Harry’s memoir?95
Watch our video ‘Why what happens with Harry and Meghan matters’ for a brief history of privacy, 
royalty and being human.
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 16: Why what happens with Harry and Meghan matters
Lord Hoffmann once described freedom of expression as ‘the trump card that always wins’ (R v Central 
Independent Television plc [1994] at 203). It appears highly unlikely that the statement is true today—if it was 
then. In a fresh look at the balance of freedom of expression against privacy, in Campbell, he said that there is 
‘no question of automatic priority. Nor is there a presumption in favour of one rather than the other’ (at [55]). 
The House of Lords in Re S [2005] found the correct approach when both Article 8 and Article 10 rights are 
involved to be:
[f]irst, neither Article as such has precedence over the other. Secondly, where the values under the 
two Articles are in conflict, an intense focus on the comparative importance of the specific rights 
being claimed in the individual case is necessary. Thirdly, the justifications for interfering with or 
restricting each right must be taken into account. Finally, the proportionality test—or ‘ultimate 
balancing test’—must be applied to each. (Lord Steyn at [17])
p. 475
95
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 29 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
By 2006, in McKennitt v Ash, it was acknowledged that both Articles 8 and 10 ECHR are ‘now the very content 
of the domestic tort that the English court must enforce’ (at [11]). In PJS [2016], the Supreme Court restated 
that neither Article takes precedence—justifications for and the proportionality of interfering with each 
Article should be considered on the facts. In Ali and another v Channel 5 Broadcast Ltd [2018], for example, 
though the broadcast complained of highlighted a debate of general public interest,96 this was considered to 
be 
↵
outweighed by the invasion of private life suffered by the claimants.97 Similarly, in Richard v BBC 
[2018], Mann J found that:
It does not follow that, because an investigation at a general level was a matter of public interest, the 
identity of the subject of the investigation also attracted that characterisation. I do not think that it 
did. Knowing that Sir Cliff was under investigation might be of interest to the gossip-mongers, but 
it does not contribute materially to the genuine public interest in the existence of police 
investigations in this area. (at [282])
The BBC’s interest in freedom of expression was not found to have outweighed the claimant’s right to 
privacy. This was in part because reporting on allegations against someone in Sir Cliff Richard’s position 
would cause ‘very serious’ consequences for him, particularly bearing in mind:
the failure of the public to keep the presumption of innocence in mind at all times [which] means 
that there is inevitably going to be stigma attached to the revelation, which is magnified in this case 
by the nature of the allegations against him, which were allegations (especially in the then climate) 
of extreme seriousness. (at [316])
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-16-4>.
16.5  Limits to the current protection
Today, our right to privacy is protected by the tort of misuse of private information underpinned by the Article 8 
ECHR right to privacy, balanced against competing considerations of freedom of expression from Article 10 
ECHR. Cases must always entail a careful balancing of these interests, as has been discussed earlier.98 
However, despite the developments outlined, the limits to the protection that can be offered remain clear. 
This is particularly evident in non-celebrity, non-publication cases, for example Wainwright and Peck.
In Wainwright, the claimants sued the Home Office for invasion of their privacy (as well as in trespass to the 
person),99 following a ‘sloppily’ performed strip-search conducted when visiting a family member in prison. 
The House of Lords stated categorically that no tort of invasion of privacy exists,100 reiterating the feeling of 
the time that it was an interest that could, and should, only be protected by using other existing legal 
mechanisms (as in Kaye). Wainwright failed because there was no question of there being any private 
information (or photographs) being disclosed: it did not fall into the same category of ‘privacy’ (or 
96
p. 476
97
98 
99
100
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 30 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
confidence) that had by then been recognised, even though what happened to Mrs Wainwright 
↵
was a 
clear invasion of her privacy (in terms of personal autonomy) in the commonly understood sense. Note, 
however, that if prison visitors were treated the same way today, an action would lie directly against the 
Home Office under the HRA—this was later confirmed by the ECtHR in Wainwright v UK [2006], where 
violations of Articles 8 and 13 ECHR were found.
Peck v UK (App No 44647/98) (2003) 36 EHRR 41 (ECtHR)
Peck was filmed on CCTV in a town centre trying to commit suicide with a knife. The police detained 
him under the Mental Health Act. He was later released. His claim arose after the CCTV footage of him 
was used by the local authority and passed to TV and newspapers to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
the CCTV system. Although his face was somewhat obscured when the images of him were published, 
people who knew him could recognise him, and he alleged this infringed his right to privacy. He 
complained to the predecessor of Ofcom and to the local authority but his claims were dismissed. He 
then took his case to the ECtHR alleging breaches of his Article 8 and 13 rights.101 The government 
relied on the fact that the information had lost any characteristic of confidentiality as it was already in 
the public domain—that is, Mr Peck’s actions were committed in public.
The ECtHR found that Article 8 had been violated as, although his actions were in a public place, 
showing him on TV and in newspapers was not the same as him being seen by passers-by. The 
relevant moment was judged to have been ‘viewed to an extent which far exceeded any exposure to a 
passer-by or security observation’ (at [53]). Consequently, as no remedy had been provided in UK law, 
there was also a breach of Article 13.102
Thus, it appears that even where breach of confidence or misuse of private information is an inadequate 
means of providing a remedy for invasion of privacy, a human rights claim may still be fruitful.
Counterpoint
It is arguable that a gendered issue exists in the developed domestic law relating to privacy. While it 
has become apparent that a perceived ‘harm’ will attract judicial protection under what can loosely be 
termed Article 8 principles—in that privacy appears to override freedom of expression when to invade 
the private sphere would or could cause ‘harm’ in some way (e.g. a set-back in drug rehabilitation or 
health (Campbell), right to life issues (Venables; Peck), breach of a contractual obligation (Douglas), 
concern for children (Bell; Murray))—these are all harms that the law might find it fairly easy to 
recognise and, as such, deem ‘deserving’ of protection.
p. 477
101
102
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 31 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
2
↵
But when the claimant’s harm becomes less tangible, such as the mere ‘distress’ suffered by Mrs 
Wainwright, the sympathetic application of Article 8 by the domestic courts seems to greatly 
diminish.103 As with other areas of tort law, who is protected turns on what is understood as ‘harm’104: 
‘[p]erceptions of harm are closely linked to law, and legal recognition—in the form of a right to 
redress—is a key signifier that harm has been incurred’.105 Moreover, judicial reluctance to widen the 
scope of the nascent privacy laws—to include privacy-related harms such as those suffered by Mrs 
Wainwright—may well have gender implications, as restrictions are placed on recovery in relation to 
harms which (historically at least) tend to be associated with (although, of course, not exclusively 
suffered by) women (especially mothers).106
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-16-5>.
16.6  Conclusion
As we have seen, there was a long-standing reluctance on the part of both Parliament and the judiciary to 
create a specific tort of invasion of privacy. Early cases had to be moulded into legal actions that did not 
necessarily fit and, it seems, could offer little protection even when they did (Kaye). Largely, the problems 
stemmed from difficulty in defining (or unwillingness to define) what the right to protect one’s privacy 
would encapsulate.
However, cases such as Douglas and Campbell shaped the (equitable) principle of breach of confidence into a 
tort of misuse of private information (as confirmed in Google Inc v Vidal-Hall and others [2015]). To establish 
the tort, a claimant must establish that they had a legitimate expectation of privacy and this must be balanced 
against the defendant’s interests. This brings into sharp focus (and in fact the development of the law has 
been shaped by) human rights considerations. A right to private life is enshrined in the ECHR and by the HRA 
in domestic law. However, rights must be balanced against competing rights and here the right to freedom of 
expression becomes important (HRA, s 12(4)). Each must be weighed against the other, according to the facts 
of each case.
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
Why do you think the judiciary and various governments in the UK have been so reluctant to formulate a 
specific law relating to the invasion of privacy?
p. 478
103
104
105
106
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 32 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
3
→
→
→
→
→
Look at the cases that revolve around invasions of privacy (e.g. Von Hannover, Douglas, Campbell, Murray, 
Mosley, Richard, Duchess of Sussex). How many of the claimants in these cases really had a ‘reasonable 
expectation of privacy’ in respect of the information they did not want to be in the press? Can you define ‘a 
reasonable expectation of privacy’ any more easily than ‘privacy’?
What harm(s) does the law find should be recognised as invasion of privacy? Is there any common element 
among the successful cases?
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-16-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Answering the problem question
Consider again the problem question at the start of this chapter. Now having read about the topic, what 
would be your advice to Elizabeth and Alessandro?
Here are some pointers to get you started:
E will want to claim against the photographer for the invasive photographs (perhaps also on behalf of her 
sister and niece). Following Campbell, the first issue is whether she (and the others) can be said to have had a 
reasonable expectation of privacy in that situation. There is much case law (including Campbell itself) that 
can be used in the analysis. It may be different for E and for the children (Murray; Weller). If there is a 
reasonable expectation of privacy then her interest in keeping the information private (derived from Art 8 
ECHR) must be weighed against any potential public interest in publication (derived from Art 10 ECHR).
E and A will want to claim against Peachy! The situation is similar but not the same as that in Douglas v 
Hello! The question is still whether there was a reasonable expectation of privacy—this was demonstrated in 
Douglas. But would it be here?
A may want to seek an injunction to prevent publication of the story about his alleged affair. The purpose 
of injunctions must be considered against the implications for freedom of speech. Many cases are similar and 
relevant (particularly in the context of private sexual relationships) and should be analysed to come to a 
conclusion on whether or not an injunction would be justified.
If you need some more guidance:
See the annotated version of the problem with issues and cases to consider <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-16-annotated- 
problem-question-interactive>.
p. 479
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 33 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Check your answer against the suggested outline answer <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-16-answers-to-problem-question>.
Further reading
Much has been written on the subject of privacy in recent years, many articles focusing on a particular case or cases. A 
good place to start is with some of the general comment pieces, such as by Aplin or McLean, or with Bennett’s 
theoretical explorations of ‘horizontal privacy’ post-Campbell. Hargreaves writes an interesting article focusing on 
relational harm in the privacy context. Phillipson and Craig bring us right up to date analysing the controversial case of 
ZXC v Bloomberg. Unfortunately, as the law in this area moves so fast, some of the writing, even the more recent 
articles, may need updating!
↵
Aplin, Tanya ‘The Development of the Action for Breach of Confidence in a Post-HRA Era’ [2007] Intellectual Property 
Quarterly 19
Bennett, Thomas ‘Corrective Justice and Horizontal Privacy: A Leaf out of Wright J’s Book’ (2010) 7 The Journal 
Jurisprudence 545
Bennett, Thomas ‘Horizontality’s New Horizons—Re-Examining Horizontal Effect: Privacy, Defamation and the Human 
Rights Act: Part 1’ (2010) 21 Entertainment Law Review 96
Bennett, Thomas ‘Horizontality’s New Horizons—Re-Examining Horizontal Effect: Privacy, Defamation and the Human 
Rights Act: Part 2’ (2010) 21 Entertainment Law Review 145
Eady, Mr Justice, Speech at University of Hertfordshire, 10 November 2009 (available from Judiciary of England and 
Wales website)
Hargreaves, Stuart ‘“Relational Privacy” and Tort’ (2017) 23 William & Mary Journal of Women and the Law 433
Martin, Steve, ‘Mud Sticks: Publication of Information About Pre-Charge Criminal Investigations and the Tort of Misuse 
of Private Information’ [2022] Cambridge Law Journal 232
McLean, Angus and Claire Mackey ‘Is there a Law of Privacy in the UK? A Consideration of Recent Legal 
Developments’ (2007) 29 European Intellectual Property Review 389
Moreham, Nicole ‘Privacy in Public Places’ [2006] Cambridge Law Journal 606
Moreham, Nicole ‘Unpacking the Reasonable Expectation of Privacy Test’ (2018) 134 Law Quarterly Review 651
Moreham, Nicole ‘Privacy and Police Investigations: ZXC v Bloomberg’ [2021] Cambridge Law Journal 5
Morgan, Jonathan ‘Privacy in the House of Lords, Again’ (2004) 120 Law Quarterly Review 563
Neuberger, Lord PSC ‘“What’s in a name?”—Privacy and anonymous speech on the Internet’ Conference 5RB Keynote 
speech, 30 September 2014
p. 480
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 34 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Phillipson, Gavin and Robert, Craig ‘Privacy, Reputation and Anonymity Until Charge’ (2022) 13 Journal of Media Law 
153
Richardson, Janice ‘If I Cannot Have Her Everybody Can: Sexual Disclosure and Privacy Law’ in Janice Richardson and 
Erika Rackley (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Tort Law (Routledge 2012) 145–62
Schreiber, Arye ‘Confidence, Crisis, Privacy Phobia: Why Invasion of Privacy Should Be Independently Recognised in 
English Law’ [2006] 2 Intellectual Property Quarterly 160
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-16-web-links?options=showName>.
Notes
 
1. See BBC News ‘Prince Harry to be paid “substantial damages” by Sun owner as it apologises for “serious intrusion”’ 
22 January 2025; Jonathan Coad ‘Prince Harry vs News UK: who won?’ Inforrm’s blog 28 January 2025; HRH The 
Duchess of Sussex v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2021]; The Duke of Sussex and others v MGN Ltd [2023].
 
2. However, none of these protects an individual’s privacy per se and all are limited in the protection offered. E.g. 
despite protectionist in-roads made in Khorasandjian v Bush [1993], since Hunter v Canary Wharf [1997] individuals 
require a proprietary interest in land to claim in private nuisance (section 18.3.2). Similarly, for recovery under the 
1997 Act, there must be a ‘course of conduct’ that amounts to harassment (section 15.6.2).
 
3. Vidal-Hall and others v Google Inc [2014].
 
4. The complete text of the Bills is available in the appendix of the Younger Report.
 
5. Report of the Committee on Privacy, Chairman: Kenneth Younger (Cmnd 5012, 1972).
 
6. (Third) Royal Commission on the Press (Cmnd 6810, July 1977).
 
7. Bill on Protection of Privacy and Right of Reply introduced by John Browne MP and Tony Worthington MP.
 
8. Committee on Privacy and Related Matters Report of the Committee on Privacy and Related Matters, Chairman: David 
Calcutt (Cm 1102, June 1990).
 
9. Privacy and Media Intrusion (Cm 2918, July 1995).
 
10. This was rejected by the government at the time (Privacy and Media Intrusion: Replies to the Committee’s Fifth 
Report 2002–2003, First Special Report (HC 213, February 2004)).
 
11. Culture, Media and Sport Committee ‘Self Regulation of the Press’ Seventh Report of Session 2006–2007 (HC 375, 
July 2007) [53].
 
12. Thomas Cooley Cooley on Torts (2nd edn 1888) 29; SD Warren and LD Brandeis ‘The Right to Privacy’ (1890) 4 
Harvard Law Review 193, 205.
 
13. Percy H Winfield ‘Privacy’ (1931) 47 Law Quarterly Review 23.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 35 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
14. William L Prosser ‘Privacy’ (1960) 48 California Law Review 383, 389. See Fenty and others v Arcadia Group Brands 
Ltd and others [2015]—otherwise known as Rihanna v Topshop—where the singer successfully sued the retailer for 
unauthorised use of her image on a vest top.
 
15. See e.g. the US Restatement (Second) of Torts (2010), especially s 652B.
 
16. See Lisa O’Carroll and Caroline Davies ‘William and Kate win French injunction over topless photos’ The Guardian 18 
September 2012.
 
17. Interestingly, other common law jurisdictions do not seem to have the same problem. The Ontario Court of Appeal 
recognised a common law tort of invasion of privacy in Jones v Tsige [2012]. Other Canadian provinces have statutory 
privacy torts. In Doe 464533 v ND [2016], the Ontario Superior Court of Justice recognised a tort of ‘publication of 
embarrassing private facts’. In New Zealand, the tort was recognised in Hosking v Runting [2004] as was a further tort 
of ‘intrusion on seclusion’ in C v Holland [2012].
 
18. At 10.
 
19. At [54].
 
20. The PCC operated an Editors’ Code of Practice addressing invasions of privacy (clause 3), including, e.g. guidance 
restricting the use of long-range lenses and in relation to people grieving, children and people in hospital.
 
21. Sara Cox v MGN Ltd [2003].
 
22. Lord Justice Leveson, Report into the Culture, Practices and Ethics of the Press (2012). See especially from p 219 (and 
in the Executive Summary from p 12).
 
23. This was Part 1 of the Leveson Inquiry—Part 2, also requested by David Cameron, cannot begin until criminal 
proceedings stemming from Part 1 are concluded. From November 2016 to January 2017 the Department for Culture, 
Media & Sport and the Home Office opened a new consultation asking in part ‘whether it is still appropriate, 
proportionate and in the public interest’ to go ahead with Part 2. In March 2018, the government controversially 
confirmed that Part 2 of the Inquiry would not go ahead.
 
24. See e.g. Patrick Wintour and Dan Sabbagh ‘Leveson Report: David Cameron refuses to “cross Rubicon” and write 
press law’ The Guardian 29 November 2012; Lisa O’Carroll ‘Leveson debate prompts criticism over “draconian” 
punitive damages plan’ The Guardian 11 January 2013.
 
25. Department for Culture, Media and Sport ‘Leveson Report: Final draft Royal Charter for proposed body to recognise 
press industry self-regulator’ (Policy paper) 11 October 2013. See also Patrick Wintour ‘Press regulation: a back- 
channel deal sealed with a 3am text message’ The Guardian 18 March 2013; Patrick Wintour, Lisa O’Carroll and 
Nicholas Watt ‘Press regulation: newspapers bridle at “historic” deal’ The Guardian 19 March 2013.
 
26. Royal Charter, art 2.2.
 
27. e.g. in September 2016 it upheld a breach of privacy complaint from the Duchess of Cambridge (now Princess of 
Wales) after she objected to online publications about herself and Prince George (Press Association ‘Duchess of 
Cambridge has privacy breach complaints upheld’ The Guardian 15 September 2016).
 
28. Ofcom, the independent regulator for the UK communications industries—with responsibilities across television, 
radio, telecommunications and wireless communications services—has similar powers in that it can issue fines and 
withdraw licences from repeat offenders. One principal duty, established under statute (Communications Act 2003), is 
maintaining ‘adequate protection for audiences against unfairness or the infringement of privacy’.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 36 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
29. IMPRESS was recognised by the Press Recognition Panel in 2016.
 
30. Note that unless or until the government decides to implement s 40 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013, there is no 
sanction for publishers who do not sign up as members of a formally recognised regulator.
 
31. IMPRESS has more guidance on the use of social media by journalists than IPSO. An interesting take on this is the 
use of social media as a source of information, especially by regional publications. See e.g. Hold the Front Page ‘Law 
Column: IPSO and the use of social media as a source’ 31 January 2017. Two courts in Northern Ireland have given 
potentially significant judgments on the civil liability of social media companies for content posted by users: see J20 v 
Facebook Ireland [2016] and CG v Facebook Ireland & McCloskey [2015]. However, a data protection/misuse of private 
information claim brought by a child claimant against social media platform TikTok, which passed the first procedural 
hurdles (SMO v TikTok Inc and others [2022]) has since been discontinued.
 
32. See Kerry Ingredients (UK) Ltd v Bakkavor Group Ltd and others [2016], concerning the recipes for flavour-infused 
cooking oils. Cf Wade & Perry v British Sky Broadcasting Ltd [2016] where the Court of Appeal found that Sky did not 
misuse confidential information in commissioning a music talent show with multiple similarities to one pitched to it 
previously by the claimants. See also Brevan Howard Asset Management LLP v Reuters Ltd and another [2017] where 
the Court of Appeal upheld the confidential nature of information provided to potential hedge fund investors.
 
33. See also British Broadcasting Corporation & Eight Other Media Organisations, R (on the application of) v F & D [2016], 
regarding anonymity of the teenage girls who murdered Angela Wrightson and a clampdown on social media 
reporting of the trial (by news agencies and members of the public). In December 2016, two brothers who tortured 
three other children in South Yorkshire (when they were aged only 10 and 11) were granted lifelong anonymity, also 
for their own protection (see BBC News ‘Edlington boy torturers granted anonymity’ 9 December 2016 and A & B v 
Persons Unknown [2016]).
 
34. See, in respect of criminal penalties that can be applied for violation of the injunction, ‘Two narrowly avoid jail after 
sharing “photos of James Bulger killer” online’ The Telegraph 31 January 2019. In 2019, an application to vary the 
confidentiality order from 2001 (preventing Venables’ identification) was refused by Sir Andrew MacFarlane, President 
of the Family Division, on the grounds that Venables’ Arts 2 and 3 rights outweighed the applicant’s Arts 8 and 10 
rights: Venables and another v News Group Papers Ltd and others [2019].
 
35. Persons formerly known as Winch and others (application for contra mundum injunction) [2021].
 
36. See further discussion of ‘responsible publication on a matter of public interest’ in the context of defamation 
(section 17.6.3).
 
37. See Robert Mendick ‘Sir Philip Green backs down: the inside story of the court case that never was’ 8 February 2019; 
Arcadia Group Ltd and others v Telegraph Media Group Ltd [2019].
 
38. Similar issues arise in relation to defamation claims—see section 17.3 and the Pause for reflection box there.
 
39. Claire Newell ‘The British #MeToo scandal which cannot be revealed’ The Telegraph 25 October 2018.
 
40. Richard Moorhead, ‘New York, London, Paris,* Munich,. [sic] Everyone’s talking about … Linklaters’ LawyerWatch 6 
February 2019.
 
41. Though, ironically perhaps, the ECtHR ruled that the Daily Mirror’s right to freedom of expression was violated by 
having to pay the £1 million legal costs (partly lawyers’ ‘success fees’) when it lost the original case (MGN Ltd v UK 
[2011]). Similar arguments have arisen in other cases considering Conditional Fee Agreements (CFAs) and After the 
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 37 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Event (ATE) insurance (see Chapter 21). In 8 Representative Claimants and others v MGN Ltd [2016] (The Mirror ‘phone 
hacking’ case), Mann J found that the regime permitting the recovery of the additional liabilities was compatible with 
Art 10 ECHR (see also Miller v Associated Newspapers [2016]). Both defendants were granted ‘leapfrog’ permission to 
appeal so that the issues could be considered by the Supreme Court alongside the appeal of Flood v Times Newspapers 
[2014] (considering whether having to pay the entire costs of the other side, including success fees and ATE premiums 
arising from a CFA (amounting to nearly £1.7 million, before interest), in a libel case in which it was partly successful, 
violated the defendant’s Arts 6 and 10 rights). In April 2017, the Supreme Court unanimously dismissed all three 
appeals (Times Newspapers Ltd and others v Flood and others [2017]).
 
42. Arden LJ (at [12]). What defeated OPO’s claim on this point was that the information to be published, though it 
would potentially affect him, was not about him (at [45]). A Supreme Court decision ultimately allowed full publication 
of the book (Rhodes v OPO (by his litigation friend BHM) and another [2015]; see further section 15.6.1).
 
43. This ‘two-stage test’ was recently explicitly confirmed by the Supreme Court in Bloomberg LP (Appellant) v ZXC 
(Respondent) [2022].
 
44. See also e.g. Loreena McKennitt v Niema Ash [2006]; HRH Prince of Wales v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2008]. An 
interesting issue may arise in relation to this in the context of ‘deadnaming’—see Izzy Lyons ‘Transgender lawyer 
launches UK’s first “deadnaming” case against Father Ted writer Graham Linehan’ The Telegraph 7 October 2018.
 
45. This is similar to, yet different from, the formulation in the US Second Restatement of Torts and the Australian case 
of Australian Broadcasting Commission v Lenah Game Meats [2001]: that disclosure must be ‘highly offensive to the 
reasonable person’ (Gleeson CJ at [42]). In Campbell, Lord Nicholls said that the phrase ‘highly offensive’ should not 
be relied on as it suggested a stricter test than ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’ and ‘could be a recipe for 
confusion’ (at [22]).
 
46. It also seems that the identity of a secret blogger is not obviously private, particularly when the blog in question 
criticised the internal workings of the police force from an insider’s perspective: see Author of a Blog v Times 
Newspapers Ltd [2009].
 
47. Would this be the case for the pop singer, in the scenarios outlined at the beginning of this chapter? If so, would her 
right to privacy outweigh the newspaper’s freedom of expression? Would this depend on anything she had said/done 
in relation to eating disorders before?
 
48. See also James Gant ‘Channel 5 pays “substantial” damages to woman who appeared on “Can’t Pay? We’ll Take it 
Away” after she took legal action over “misuse of private information” when she was filmed in row over unpaid 
parking fine’ Mail Online, 16 November 2021.
 
49. Brake v Guy and others [2022].
 
50. Though in that case the application for an injunction to prevent the photographs in question being republished was 
denied.
 
51. ERY v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2016]. See also WFZ v British Broadcasting Corporation [2023].
 
52. See also NT1 & NT2 v Google LLC [2018].
 
53. News of the World ‘F1 boss has sick Nazi orgy with 5 hookers’ 30 March 2008. Mosley sued for both aggravated 
(punitive) and compensatory damages (see section 21.2) but was awarded only compensatory damages, plus costs. 
The award was £60,000, reported to be over three times higher than the previous highest privacy award (though note 
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 38 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
that the BBC reported that the same judge awarded Hugh Grant, Liz Hurley and Arun Nayar £58,000 in May 2008 in a 
case concerning long-range photographs of them on a private beach (BBC News ‘Grant and Hurley Win Privacy Payout’ 
17 May 2008)). These awards—thought to mark the ceiling of what may be awarded in privacy claims—were overtaken 
in Gulati and others v MGN [2016] where significant payments ranging from £72,500 to £260,250 were ordered following 
the serious and repeated criminal invasions of privacy in the ‘celebrity’ phone-hacking cases. Now, the highest award 
seems to have been made to Sir Cliff Richard, who was awarded £210,000 general and aggravated damages, plus an 
amount for special damages (see Chapter 21) to be later determined (Richard v BBC and another [2018]). South 
Yorkshire Police, the second defendant in the case, had already settled the case for £400,000 plus costs in 2017. Prince 
Harry, one of several claimants against Mirror Group Newspapers, was awarded £140,600 in part of his ongoing 
campaign against the tabloid press (The Duke of Sussex and others v MGN Ltd [2023]), though also in January 2025 he 
achieved an apology and settlement said to amount to around £10 million from News Group Newspapers for ‘serious 
intrusion’ into his private life (including obtaining information by unlawful means). In contrast, an award of just £5,000 
was ordered in Burrell v Clifford [2016]. The case illustrates potential issues about access to justice and the fact that 
claimants with ‘low value’ claims would find it hard to take cases if normal costs rules were not followed.
 
54. See also Contostavlos v Mendahun [2012].
 
55. In 2008, Mosley asked the ECtHR to uphold a right to prior notification—that is, for the government to pass a law 
obliging newspapers, etc to warn people in advance when intimate or sexual details were about to be published. His 
claim was rejected (Mosley v UK [2011] at [119]), though he was unwilling to concede defeat. In Mosley v Google [2015], 
he defeated Google’s arguments that his claim under the Data Protection Act should be struck out, meaning that 
Google must block images of the original photographs via its search engine. The case was later settled out of court.
 
56. Also confirmed by the Supreme Court in PJS [2016] and reiterated in XLD v KZL [2020], BVG v LAR [2020], JRV & ARC v 
BRG [2023] and WFZ v British Broadcasting Corporation [2023].
 
57. However, publication of photographs depicting the event was prohibited. See also A v B plc [2002]; BBC v 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd and another [2010]; Trimingham v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2012]; AAA v Associated 
Newspapers Ltd [2013].
 
58. Rocknroll v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2013]. See also Reid v Price [2020], where some of the information about 
the claimant’s sexual conduct that he successfully sued the defendant—Katie Price—for disclosing was already 
publicly known.
 
59. This had earlier persuaded the Court of Appeal to overturn the injunction (see [47]) and Lord Toulson in dissent. In 
PJS v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2016], the High Court approved an agreed final order in the action. See further 
Tommy Chen ‘PJS and the Tort of Misuse of Private Information’ (2016) 11 Journal of Intellectual Property Law and 
Practice 892.
 
60. The IPSO Editors’ Code should be remembered in this context—clause 6 applies to children specifically—part (v) 
states that ‘editors must not use the fame, notoriety or position of a parent or guardian as sole justification for 
publishing details of a child’s private life’. The ‘public interest’ section of the Code (discussed at section 16.3.1) may 
apply however, though para 5 states that in ‘cases involving children under 16, editors must demonstrate an 
exceptional public interest to over-ride the normally paramount interests of the child’.
 
61. See also Rocknroll v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2013]. However, the determinant factor from von Hannover is 
always ‘the contribution the published information will make to a debate of general interest’ (Ward LJ at [23]). See 
also Tugendhat J in Spelman v Express Newspapers [2012] (from [55]).
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 39 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
62. In March 2016, the defendants in Weller were refused leave to appeal the decision to the Supreme Court. What 
would be the issues and likely outcome of a claim by the TV newsreader in the scenario described at the beginning of 
the chapter?
 
63. See especially Lord Mance at [35]–[37] and Lady Hale’s judgment from [72]. See also Ali and another v Channel 5 
Broadcast Ltd [2018] (at [152]).
 
64. See e.g. Bull v Desporte [2019].
 
65. Though see the successful claim in Wood v Chief of Police for the Metropolis [2009], where the Court of Appeal ruled 
that the retention of photographs taken of the claimant (an arms trade protestor) by the police was a violation of his 
Art 8 right.
 
66. cf Khuja (formerly known as PNM) v Times Newspapers Ltd [2017].
 
67. Also see Rocknroll v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2013]. Contrast AAA v Associated Newspapers [2013].
 
68. Conversely, the iniquitous behaviour of the defendant in NNN v D1 and another [2014] (blackmail) may have been 
one of the reasons for granting an injunction and anonymity to the claimant. It certainly was in LJY v Persons Unknown 
[2017] (see Warby J at [2]), where a threat was made against a well-known person ‘in the entertainment business’ that 
information about an alleged historic offence would be disclosed to the authorities and the press, as well as in NPV v 
QEL and another [2018] in relation to ‘a successful businessman’. In LJY, Warby J explained that ‘The blackmail 
element strengthens the claim. Such conduct considerably reduces the weight attached [or] to be attached to any 
freedom of expression argument and correspondingly increases the weight of the arguments in favour of restraining 
publication’ (at [26]).
 
69. Compare A v B plc [2003], a case relating to disclosure of information about Premiership footballer Garry Flitcroft’s 
extramarital affairs. Allowing publication in ‘the public interest’, the Court of Appeal seemed keen to stress that the 
protection afforded to information about sexual behaviour in ‘transient relationships’ should not be as great as that 
afforded to that within marriage (see e.g. Lord Woolf CJ at [11] and [43]). How might this impact on the Olympic 
medallist in the scenarios at the beginning of the chapter? Also consider Trimingham v Associated Newspapers Ltd 
[2012] and AAA v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2013].
 
70. Injunctions not only granting anonymity but also prohibiting publication of information about the very existence of 
legal proceedings.
 
71. See e.g. AVB v TDD [2014] and JRV & ARC v BRG [2023]. Though note, however, that the fact that details of a sexual 
relationship are generally considered private does not necessarily mean that the ‘bare fact’ of the existence of a sexual 
relationship is: see e.g. Ntuli v Donald [2010], Goodwin v NGN Ltd [2011]; or vice versa (details can be published but 
anonymity granted): see e.g. JIH v NGN Ltd [2011]. Injunctions preventing the press from naming an individual may 
also be maintained even after that individual has been named elsewhere (in one case, in Parliament and many 
internet/social media sites): CTB v NGN Ltd and another [2011] (later Giggs (formerly known as CTB) v NGN Ltd and 
another [2012]). In AAA v Rakoff [2019], anonymity orders were refused to nine dancers at Spearmint Rhino’s ‘sexual 
entertainment venues’ among comments that anonymity should not be seen by claimants as an inevitability.
 
72. CTB v NGN Ltd and another [2011].
 
73. This was perhaps compounded by the fact that he was the captain of the England football team and the exposure of 
his wrongdoing came in the run-up to the 2010 World Cup. Similarly, in finding nothing to substantiate Terry’s 
application for a super-injunction, the court appeared influenced by the claimant’s desire (or that of his agent) to 
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 40 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
protect his commercial interests. See Sam Jones ‘John Terry case sparks government concern over super-injunctions’ 
The Guardian 31 January 2010. See also Ferdinand v MGN Ltd (Rev 2) [2011] for similar issues raised regarding the 
player who succeeded John Terry to the England captaincy and McClaren v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2012] in 
relation to the former England manager.
 
74. Tugendhat J at [100].
 
75. The anonymity order was granted despite indications that some of the information about the claimant’s affairs was 
already in the public domain. This seems contrary to some earlier cases, notably Theakston [2002].
 
76. Note that this was in the context of preserving the anonymity or otherwise of three brothers subject to freezing 
orders in connection with terrorism allegations. See also R (Mohamed) v Foreign Secretary (No 2) [2010], Graiseley 
Properties Ltd and others v Barclays Bank plc and others [2013], and PNM v Times Newspapers Ltd and others [2014].
 
77. At [4].
 
78. In a slightly different but related context, in January 2017, a seven-member Supreme Court heard an appeal against 
PNM v Times Newspapers [2014], an important case considering the basis of the open justice principle in the context of 
whether information that was mentioned in open court (concerning a person who was arrested in relation to 
grooming offences but not charged) could be reported. A 5:2 majority dismissed the appeal from the refusal of 
Tugendhat J and the Court of Appeal to grant an injunction to prevent his name being disclosed. The man was named 
and the case became Khuja (formerly known as PNM) v Times Newspapers [2017].
 
79. e.g. in January 2017, The Times reported that it was subjected to a gagging order pursued by Ryan Giggs in relation 
to the terms and financial aspects of his divorce.
 
80. RJW & SJW v The Guardian Newspaper & Person or Persons Unknown [2009].
 
81. Lord Neuberger MR ‘Report of the Committee on Super-Injunctions: Super-Injunctions, Anonymised Injunctions and 
Open Justice’, May 2011. Interestingly, the report confirmed that from the beginning of 2010 until the date of 
publication, there had only been two super-injunctions, one lasting only for one week (DFT v TFD [2010]) and the other 
overturned on appeal (Ntuli v Donald [2010]). Now see AVB v TDD [2014].
 
82. As an indication of the number of cases we are talking about, there were 41 privacy claims in the Media and 
Communications list of the Queen’s Bench Division (as it then was) in 2020 (11 per cent of the total list), according to 
Inforrm (Inforrm ‘Media and Communications List: Analysis of Claims Issued in 2020’ 2 January 2021).
 
83. Mail on Sunday ‘The return of the “super injunction”: Celebrity gags press from reporting story on their “personal 
and professional life”’ 5 February 2017.
 
84. The Guardian ‘Publication of hacked David Beckham emails renders injunction worthless’ 6 February 2017.
 
85. See also Ali and another v Channel 5 Broadcast Ltd [2018] where Arnold J referred to the televised footage as 
‘voyeuristic’ in nature (at [215]).
 
86. Reported in the Sun on Sunday on 12 March 2017 under the headline ‘Judge gags press’. No public judgment has 
ever been handed down and the only details are those from the newspaper, which had been allowed to report on the 
anonymised proceedings.
 
87. Bloomberg LP (Appellant) v ZXC (Respondent) [2022].
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 41 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
88. Not everyone agrees that this is the correct approach—see Nicole Moreham ‘Why police investigations should not 
be regarded as private, Part 1’ Inforrm’s blog 18 February 2020.
 
89. HL Deb, 24 November 1997, vol 583, col 784.
 
90. It is notable, e.g. that freedom of expression and ‘freedom of thought, conscience and religion’ are the only 
Convention rights given this express treatment under the HRA—i.e. only these rights are singled out as deserving 
special attention by the courts.
 
91. Confirmed in Re S [2005] and reiterated by the Supreme Court in PJS [2016] at [19]–[20], [51] and [65].
 
92. Exceptions include Malone v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis (No 2) [1979], which concerned phone tapping 
by the police, and Wainwright, concerning an intimate strip-search of visitors to a prison.
 
93. Compare the ECtHR decision in von Hannover v Germany (No 2) [2012], in which Princess Caroline attempted to 
prevent the continued use of the same pictures. This time, with a different understanding of the claimant as a ‘public 
figure’ rather than a ‘private individual’, the Court found no violation of Art 8 and that publication of the pictures 
alongside the article in question contributed to a debate of public interest. A similar conclusion was reached in von 
Hannover v Germany (No 3) [2013]. Also see Lillo-Stenberg and Sæther v Norway [2014] and Hájovský v Slovakia [2021].
 
94. This was essentially the question for the law lords in Campbell. It has become even more apposite in light of press 
scandals and the increase in social media forums, blogging etc in recent years. An interesting example of where the 
press was deemed not to have gone ‘too far’ is in the privacy/harassment claim brought by Carina Trimingham (lover 
of married former MP Chris Huhne), who was herself formerly in a civil partnership: Trimingham v Associated 
Newspapers Ltd [2012]. In February 2013, following the conviction of Huhne for perverting the course of justice, 
Trimingham withdrew her appeal against this decision. See also Abbey v Gilligan and others [2012].
 
95. Note that in February 2021, just weeks before the Oprah interview was televised, the Duchess of Sussex succeeded 
in her claim for misuse of private information with respect to a series of newspaper articles reproducing parts of a 
private letter she wrote to her father in 2018. This was upheld by the Court of Appeal later the same year: HRH The 
Duchess of Sussex v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2021].
 
96. ‘[I]ncreasing levels of personal debt, and in particular rent arrears of tenants in privately-rented accommodation; 
the dependence of tenants on benefits, and in particular housing benefit; the effect of enforcement of writs of 
possession by HCEAs [High Court Enforcement Agents]; and the consequences for both landlords and tenants’ (at 
[185]).
 
97. The programme was said to have had 9.65 million viewers, and clips of it were shared on Facebook and other social 
media. The claimants were each awarded £10,000. An appeal (to increase the award of damages) and cross-appeal (on 
the public interest) was heard in December 2018. Neither was successful (Ali and another v Channel 5 Broadcasting Ltd 
[2019]).
 
98. Though the first step to a successful claim is still to establish a ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’ so as to engage 
Art 8: see Hutcheson (Formerly Known As ‘KGM’) v News Group Newspapers Ltd and others [2011]; Goodwin v NGN Ltd 
[2011].
 
99. The facts and other claims in Wainwright are discussed in section 15.6.1. However, it has recently been confirmed 
that a free-standing cause of action in relation to physical privacy does not exist: Pryor v Liverpool Women’s NHS 
Foundation Trust & Lumsden [2021].
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
16. Invasion of privacy
Page 42 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
100. See, in particular, the speech of Lord Hoffmann at [31]–[35], with whom Lords Hope and Hutton agreed. Lord 
Hoffmann later reiterated the same point in Campbell at [43].
 
101. Article 13 guarantees the right to an effective remedy.
 
102. Would the same be the case for the teenager in the scenarios at the beginning of the chapter, caught on CCTV 
committing an act of vandalism? It is not clear that it was merely the fact that publication of the pictures or also the 
fact that his actions were inherently of a private nature that was decisive in that case. Might criminal activity be 
different?
 
103. Compare AVB v TDD [2014].
 
104. Compare the decision in Rothwell v Chemical and Insulating Co Ltd [2007] on the harm caused by the 
development of pleural plaques following negligent exposure to asbestos fibres (section 5.5) (see also Dryden and 
others v Johnson Matthey plc [2018]) or the birth of unwanted children after a doctor’s negligent action or advice 
(section 7.5.2).
 
105. Joanne Conaghan ‘Law, Harm and Redress: A Feminist Perspective’ (2002) 22 Legal Studies 319, 322.
 
106. Joanne Conaghan ‘Tort Law and Feminist Critique’ (2003) 56 Current Legal Problems 175, 186.
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
