19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 1 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0019
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter examines the rule from Rylands v Fletcher [1868]. The rule holds that where there has been an escape of a 
dangerous thing in the course of a non-natural use of land, the occupier of that land is liable for the damage to another caused 
as a result of the escape, irrespective of fault. The rule today is best understood through a trilogy of cases: Rylands v Fletcher, 
Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather plc [1994] and Transco v Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council [2004]. The 
development of the rule has led to an increased overlap with ideas from nuisance and negligence.
Keywords: 
tort law, Rylands v Fletcher, land use, liability
Problem question
Read this problem question carefully and keep it in mind while you are working through the 
chapter that follows. At the end of the chapter you will be able to apply what you have learnt to the 
problem question and advise the relevant parties.
Rack-and-Horse supermarket owns land on which it has built a huge two-storey metal-framed 
customer car park. One day, after extremely stormy weather with strong winds and heavy rain, the 
top level of the car park buckles; some of the metal railing breaks free and falls onto the neighbouring 
petrol station owned by Low-Price-Pumps. The impact damages the pumps and injures one of Low- 
Price-Pumps’ customers. Furthermore, water that had collected on the upper level of the car park due 
to an inadequate drainage system pours on to Low-Price-Pumps, flooding the forecourt of the petrol 
station. The station has had to close for two days, causing £10,000 loss of profit.
p. 586
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 2 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
Low-Price-Pumps spends £50,000 having the forecourt cleaned and making safe the pumps. Rack- 
and-Horse argues that damage to the pumps caused by high winds is something that Low-Price- 
Pumps could and should have insured against.
Advise the parties.
19.1  Introduction
Consider the following examples:
Horsechester Council’s outdoor swimming pool has to be closed after an adjacent ornamental lake 
bursts its banks after heavy rainfall and lake water floods into the pool, making it unsafe.
A gas pipe owned by Racksco and supplying gas for domestic use is exposed after a tap is left on 
accidentally by an old lady living in a warden-assisted flat provided for her by Horsechester Council. Over 
time, water seeps from her premises to an embankment supporting the pipe, causing it to weaken and 
eventually crumble.
↵
 A large pile of wood and other materials is collected on land belonging to Horsechester Fire 
Service, in preparation for its annual bonfire party on 5 November, to which all residents of the town are 
invited. A group of youths is caught trying to set the pile of wood alight, and fire officers dampen the wood 
down until they are ready to light it themselves. However, wind transports some still smouldering pieces of 
wood to the neighbouring property, where they burn down a garden shed.
We have already considered the way in which trespass, private nuisance and, to a lesser extent, public 
nuisance protect people’s ability to exercise their rights to enjoy land without undue or unreasonable 
interference. In this chapter, we consider a particular cause of action, a variation on the nuisance theme—the 
rule from Rylands v Fletcher [1868]. This protects an occupier against interference due to an isolated escape 
from (as opposed to an ongoing interference with) neighbouring land. This action is rare. It has been shaped 
over time by three key cases: Rylands v Fletcher, Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather plc [1994] 
and Transco v Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council [2003].
The Rylands rule is another method for regulating land use. It emerged out of the Industrial Revolution’s 
widespread impact on society, beginning in the eighteenth century, changing the face of the country by the 
mid-nineteenth century—becoming far less agricultural and increasingly industrial. With industry came 
increased risk of harm from things such as water, noxious chemicals and so on ‘escaping’ from reservoirs, 
factories and the like. Rylands was a direct legal response to some of these risks. It created so-called ‘strict 
liability’ for such escapes—that is, liability without fault.1 Owners of factories, reservoirs and so on would be 
liable even if they had taken all reasonable care to ensure that escapes did not occur. As in the previous 
chapter, we will also look here at the contribution the Rylands rule makes, or could make, to the protection of 
p. 587
1
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 3 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
the environment—given its very nature it perhaps has a clearer role to play in this respect than nuisance. 
However, we will see not only that the rule appears to have limited use in the modern day2 but also that the 
strictness of its liability appears to have become somewhat diluted.
19.2  The rule in Rylands v Fletcher
The rule in Rylands holds that where there has been an escape of a dangerous thing in the context of a non- 
natural use of land, the occupier of that land is liable for the damage to another caused as a result of the 
escape, irrespective of fault. A strict liability rule seems somewhat incongruous against the increasing 
incidence of fault-based considerations in modern nuisance cases.3 That said, liability under the rule, while 
strict, is not absolute. There are defences to the action and the courts have decided that defendants should be 
liable only for foreseeable consequences of escapes. In fact, until relatively recently, the rule was largely 
considered to be of little real significance—an interesting relic of legal history. As we shall 
↵
see, the 
action has been rarely used. Though the decision in Cambridge Water reawakened interest (particularly 
academic), any enthusiastic revival of the rule seems overly ambitious given that Cambridge Water further 
limits the scope of Rylands actions and arguably, therefore, its usefulness. In Transco, Lord Hoffmann 
remarked that ‘it is perhaps not surprising that counsel could not find a reported case since the Second World 
War in which anyone had succeeded in a claim under the rule’ (at [39]). The rarity of success in a Rylands 
claim seems unlikely to change following further limitations from Transco.
Rylands v Fletcher (1868) LR 3 HL 330 (HL)
The defendant mill owner employed independent contractors to build a reservoir on his land to 
provide water for his mill. During construction, the contractors discovered disused shafts from an old 
coal mine on the defendant’s land, which they assumed had been blocked up. However, when the 
reservoir was filled, the water in it burst through the old shafts, flooding the claimant’s operating 
mine. The claimant sought compensation from the mill owner for the damage caused.
The independent contractors had clearly been negligent in failing to ensure that the mineshafts were 
properly blocked up, but the claimant’s action was against his neighbour, and he had not (and could 
not reasonably have) known of the existence of the shafts on his land and so could not be shown to be 
negligent (nor was he vicariously liable for the contractors’ negligence). The court also doubted 
whether an isolated escape of something from one area of land to another (as opposed to an ongoing 
emanation) could found an action in nuisance. Nevertheless, the claim succeeded.
Although the case went to the House of Lords, it was Blackburn J in the Court of Exchequer Chamber 
(Fletcher v Rylands and another [1866]) who has long been considered to have given the classic 
statement of principle, finding that:
2
3
p. 588
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 4 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
the true rule of law is that the person who for his own purposes brings on his land and 
collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it escapes, must keep it in at his 
peril, and, if he does not do so, is prima facie answerable for all the damage which is the 
natural consequence of its escape.
The House of Lords approved this principle (at 339–40), Lord Cairns adding the stipulation that the 
defendant must also be engaged in a ‘non-natural’ use of land (at 338).
In Rylands, the defendant was strictly liable for all the damage caused by the escape of the water from the 
reservoir, even though he was in no way to blame for it.4 While this may not, at first glance, seem very ‘fair’, 
like many cases it is a product of its time. It was decided in a climate of rising social and political concern 
about the dangers of reservoirs and other processes of industrialisation at a time when another serious 
reservoir incident had recently occurred, causing severe loss of life. This may have persuaded the courts that 
strict liability 
↵
in such circumstances was necessary to ensure ‘social justice’ in the sense of protecting 
people against the ravages of industrialisation.5
Claimants must establish four requirements to succeed under the rule. The first three derive from Rylands 
itself; the first two from Blackburn J’s often-quoted statement in the Court of Exchequer and the third added 
by Lord Cairns in the House of Lords. The fourth requirement was not added until much later and comes from 
the leading opinion of Lord Goff in Cambridge Water.
The defendant brings on his land for his own purposes something likely to do mischief …
… if it escapes …
… which represents a non-natural use of land …
and which causes foreseeable damage of the relevant type.
We will look at each of the requirements in turn.
19.2.1  ‘The defendant brings on his land for his own purposes something likely 
to do mischief …’
This requires a voluntary act of bringing something on the land, and is perhaps the natural result of concern 
about industrial practices. Blackburn J justified his rule by explaining that it could deal with the effect of 
industry on those who had no control over it, saying:
the person whose grass or corn is eaten down by the escaping cattle of his neighbour, or whose mine 
is flooded by the water from his neighbour’s reservoir, or whose cellar is invaded by the filth of his 
neighbour’s privy, or whose habitation is made unhealthy by the fumes and noisome vapours of his 
neighbour’s alkali works, is damnified without any fault of his own. (at 280)
4
p. 589
5
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 5 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The interesting question, however, is what constitutes things that can be brought onto land that are ‘likely to 
do mischief’—though ‘brought onto’ in this sense probably means ‘kept on’. Notably, most of the things the 
cases have been concerned with would be perfectly harmless in and of themselves if they were not allowed to 
escape. In Rylands, water (collected in large volume in one area) was obviously within the ‘likely to do 
mischief’ category and, since then, other cases have determined that electricity (National Telephone Co v 
Baker [1893]), gas (Batchellor v Tunbridge Wells Gas Co [1901]), noxious fumes (West v Bristol Tramways Co 
[1908]) and even a flagpole (Shiffman v Order of St John [1936]) or part of a fairground ride (Hale v Jennings 
[1938]) also fit the description. Put simply, the thing or substance brought onto land need not be ultra- 
hazardous but must be capable of causing damage—and therefore be dangerous—if it escapes.
This requirement seems to have been reinforced and made harder to satisfy by the House of Lords in Transco.
Transco v Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council [2003] UKHL 61 (HL)
The defendant owned a block of flats next to a disused railway embankment, which it also owned. A 
pipe carrying water to the flats from the water main leaked and a large quantity of water travelled 
through a crack in the ground to the embankment, over time saturating it and causing it to collapse. 
There was no evidence that the leak was due to any carelessness on the part of the defendant. When 
the embankment collapsed it exposed and left unsupported a high-pressure gas pipeline owned by 
Transco (formerly part of British Gas), who had to act promptly to prevent the pipe fracturing. Their 
preventative actions cost about £94,000.
The first question for the court was whether the defendant had ‘brought something on to his land 
likely to do mischief’. In answering, Lord Bingham said:
I do not think that the mischief or danger test should be at all easily satisfied. It must be 
shown that the defendant has done something which he recognised, or judged by the 
standards appropriate at the relevant place and time, he ought reasonably to have 
recognised, as giving rise to an exceptionally high risk of danger or mischief if there should 
be an escape however unlikely an escape may have been thought of. (at [10])
This set a very high threshold, which the law lords found was not satisfied in Transco. In addition, 
Lord Scott stated that Transco’s claim should fail because there had been no ‘escape’ from the 
defendant’s land (see section 19.2.2)—the water from the leaking pipe had simply moved from one 
part of the defendant’s land to another; it had not exited the land or gone over any boundary.
This means that the test as to what is ‘likely to do mischief if it escapes’ is in fact quite strict. Only when it can 
be shown that the defendant recognised (or should have recognised) that an exceptionally high risk of danger 
arose if the thing or substance accumulated on their land was able to escape will there be any possibility of 
liability arising. This would not change even if the risk of an escape taking place was low.6
p. 590
6
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 6 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Counterpoint
Essentially, the ‘likely to do mischief’ test was transformed into a foreseeability test by Transco. A 
defendant will not now incur liability if they could not have foreseen an exceptionally high risk of 
danger should whatever was brought onto their land escape. As we indicated in our discussion of 
private nuisance (section 18.3.3.3), foreseeability, as a requirement in land torts (traditionally 
understood as distinct from the tort of negligence), seems rather misplaced—it hints at there being a 
requirement of fault. This is particularly troubling in relation to Rylands liability, which is supposed to 
be strict. So, it should not matter whether the defendant could or should have ‘recognised’ (foreseen) 
that a thing would give rise to an exceptionally high risk of danger if it escaped.
19.2.2  ‘… if it escapes …’
The Rylands rule was established to deal with isolated escapes from land and therefore proof of an actual 
escape of a ‘thing likely to do mischief’ is vital. In Read v Lyons [1947], a munitions inspector was injured 
while visiting a munitions factory when an artillery shell exploded during the manufacturing process. As 
there was no indication that the manufacturers had been negligent, the claimant brought an action in 
Rylands. The House of Lords rejected her claim. There had been no ‘escape’—the shell had not left the 
defendant’s premises. Crucially, the claimant was still on the property when she was injured: had she stepped 
over the threshold, she would have succeeded. The law lords held that an escape occurs only when the 
substance or item causing damage actually moves from the defendant’s premises to a place outside the 
defendant’s occupation or control. This was confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Stannard (t/a Wyvern Tyres) v 
Gore [2012]. Tyres stored on the defendant’s land caught fire, subsequently destroying both the claimant’s 
and the defendant’s premises. While agreeing that it would be possible for Rylands liability to be based on fire, 
the court found that this would be rare, as it would need to be the fire itself that was brought onto land and 
then escaped. As the tyres themselves had not escaped, there could be no liability.7
Pause for reflection
Lord Macmillan held (obiter) in Read v Lyons that he was not prepared to allow personal injury claims 
under Rylands. He said that ‘as the law now stands an allegation of negligence is in general essential 
to the relevancy of an action of reparation for personal injuries’ (at 16–17).8 Do you agree? Should 
liability be confined to property damage or do you think that when people keep ‘dangerous’ things or 
substances on their land which injure someone if they escape, they should pay compensation?
There has been some debate as to whether intentionally releasing something from one’s land is capable of 
being viewed as an ‘escape’ and therefore falling within the Rylands sphere of liability. In Rigby v Chief 
Constable of Northamptonshire [1985], police officers, in an attempt to catch a criminal hiding in a shop, fired 
p. 591
7
8
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 7 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
CS gas into the premises to ‘flush’ the man out. This resulted in a fire which damaged the shop. The court 
held that where direct harm had been caused by an intentional act, trespass would be the correct action. 
However, in Crown River Cruises Ltd v Kimbolton Fireworks Ltd [1996], Potter J suggested that intentional 
releases (in this case fireworks) could be deemed to be ‘escapes’ if not deliberately aimed in the direction of 
the claimant or their property.
19.2.3  ‘… which represents a non-natural use of land …’
As we have seen, the third requirement that there be a ‘non-natural’ use of land was added by Lord Cairns in 
the House of Lords in Rylands. This was his interpretation of the original formulation from Blackburn J in the 
lower court, who referred to the defendant bringing onto or accumulating on the property something ‘which 
was not naturally there’. This means that the rule does not apply to things that are naturally to be found on a 
particular area of land. However, what is naturally on land—or what is ‘non-natural use’—has been variously 
interpreted over time.
It appears clear, for example, that no liability can arise in respect of trees, shrubs or other plants that are 
naturally found on the defendant’s land, even if some part of these ‘escapes’ onto the claimant’s property 
(Giles v Walker [1890]).9 It might be different, however, if the trees or plants in question were introduced by 
the defendant. The classic definition of ‘non-natural use’ is found in Rickards v Lothian [1913]:
It is not every use to which land is put that brings into play [the] principle. It must be some special 
use bringing with it increased danger to others, and must not merely be the ordinary use of land or 
such use as is proper for the general benefit of the community. (Lord Moulton at 280)
In Rickards, a tap was left running by an unknown party in the part of a building leased by the defendant. This 
caused a flood, damaging the claimant’s goods stored on the floor below. Despite there being an escape, no 
liability was found as the defendant was found to have been using the premises in an ordinary way.
Counterpoint
‘Non-natural’ use appears to have become ‘non-ordinary’ use—a much narrower definition, as many 
things that are not ‘natural’ on land will in fact be quite ordinary. Further, what is ‘ordinary’ will 
depend on the time, place and context of the use of the land in question. This definition makes the test 
look a little like negligence (or like the reasonable user test in nuisance) and has allowed the courts to 
decide that various industrial activities are in fact ‘natural’ uses of land. This not only goes against the 
rule’s strict liability origins but would seemingly water down any impact that it could have on 
environmental protection.
p. 592
9
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 8 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
In British Celanese v Hunt [1969], strips of metal escaped from a factory where the defendants 
manufactured electrical components. These hit overhead power lines, causing a power failure to the 
claimant’s factory. However, because the area in which both factories were sited was given over to an 
industrial estate, the defendants escaped liability under Rylands (although they were on other 
grounds found liable in both negligence and nuisance). The substance in question was certainly not 
‘naturally’ on the land: it had been brought there by the defendants and had escaped—but the use of 
the land was ‘ordinary’ in the context of industry, as well as being beneficial to the community (in the 
sense of providing a necessary commodity, creating employment, etc). Similarly, in Read v Lyons, the 
manufacture of artillery shells in wartime was found to be a natural use of land given the political/ 
social context (although it should be noted 
↵
that the Read decision was later doubted in Transco). 
The most recent interpretations of ‘non-natural’ use come from the Court of Appeal. In Stannard (t/a 
Wyvern Tyres) v Gore [2012], the storage of around 3,000 tyres was deemed natural use of land, despite 
them igniting and the fire escaping, destroying the neighbouring premises, and even though the 
capacity of a typical storage facility was exceeded and the stacking of the tyres was done ‘haphazardly 
and untidily’.10 In Northumbrian Water Ltd v McAlpine Ltd [2014], in the context of large quantities of 
wet concrete escaping into a water drain (later setting, causing extensive damage), Moore-Bick LJ 
stated that ‘redevelopment of land in an urban setting cannot in my view be regarded as other than 
normal and reasonable, unless it involves the use of unusual methods of working’ (at [19]).
The definition of ‘ordinary’ use of land will inevitably change with time (for example, keeping a car 
was ‘non-natural’ in 1919, but would not be regarded as so today) and context. Having such a broadly 
interpretable rule allows courts considerable flexibility when deciding whether to apply the rule in a 
new case. Overall, in our view, this had a negative effect on the use of the rule in Rylands as it means 
that claimants are far less likely to succeed in any claim taken against general industrialised activity, 
which, of course, are the very activities likely to do the most damage (and the very activities from 
which the strict liability principle arose). There is no real explanation why the courts felt that this 
change of direction was necessary. Perhaps it was to limit the number of claims in a similar way to the 
duty of care in negligence, which may in turn be a consequence of changed emphasis in the law of tort 
and whose interests it is used to protect.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-19-2>.
p. 593
10
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 9 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
19.3  Cambridge Water v Eastern Counties Leather plc
Cambridge Water was a major case that substantially changed the meaning of ‘non-natural use’ (or ‘non- 
ordinary use’) of land. In the background to this case sit a number of common law decisions (e.g. Ballard v 
Tomlinson [1885]) which recognised that downstream landowners hold a ‘natural right’ to receive water in its 
‘natural quality and quantity’.11
Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather plc [1994] 2 AC 264 
(HL)
The defendants owned and operated a tannery and, in the process of degreasing leather pelts, used a 
particular chemical solvent—perchloroethylene (PCE)—for many years, until 1976. In the tanning 
process, large quantities of PCE had been spilled onto the concrete floor of the tannery. Over time, this 
seeped through the concrete and into the soil below, from where it ‘travelled’, eventually entering the 
watercourse and polluting a well situated 1.3 miles away and owned by the claimants for extracting 
drinking water for the city of Cambridge. The PCE pollution in the water was only discovered in 1983 
when the water company became obliged by a European Directive to test for certain chemicals. 
Cambridge Water was forced to move its well, 
↵
at a cost of more than £1 million, and sued the 
defendants for the costs associated with the relocation in negligence, nuisance and under the rule in 
Rylands.
By the time the case reached the House of Lords, the claims in negligence and nuisance had failed, 
largely because the harm that had occurred had been unforeseeable to the defendants. This left only 
the Rylands action. Giving the leading opinion in the House of Lords, Lord Goff felt bound to say that 
‘the storage of substantial quantities of chemicals on industrial premises should be regarded as an 
almost classic case of non-natural use’ (at 309), notwithstanding any benefit to the community that 
is served by the industry or the fact that this might be seen (especially in a tannery) to be an ‘ordinary 
use’ of the land in question. He also found that the PCE entering the watercourse could be viewed as 
an isolated escape, despite the fact it had happened over a period of time and was caused by many 
separate spillages. However, despite these liberal interpretations, the claimants could not recover 
because the damage was ultimately too remote.
19.3.1  ‘… and which causes foreseeable damage of the relevant type’
Lord Goff’s view on the ‘escape’ and the issue of ‘non-natural’ use of land appears to contradict the direction 
taken by the courts in the mid-twentieth century. While this may be viewed as a good thing, in that courts 
would subsequently be more able and therefore more likely to find ‘non-natural’ uses of land (a triumph for 
environmentalists),12 the reason for the changed approach shows that this is not indeed the case. As we 
mentioned earlier, a fourth requirement to the Rylands test was added in Cambridge Water—what prevented 
11
p. 594
12
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 10 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
the claimant’s recovery of damages was the fact that the harm suffered was regarded as too remote. Lord Goff 
added the requirement that any damage caused by the escape must be foreseeable and, in considering this, 
held that it was not foreseeable even to the skilled person that quantities of chemical spilt on concrete would 
ultimately cause damage to the claimant’s well. Although some damage from the spillage of the PCE might be 
imagined, the damage to the claimant’s well could not be, particularly given that the European Directive had 
not been in force.
Lord Goff justified his findings by analogy to nuisance (which, as discussed in section 18.3.3.3, also has a 
foreseeability requirement) and by allusion to Blackburn J’s original formulation in Rylands, in which he 
referred to ‘anything likely to do mischief if it escapes’. In fact, it is said that as a student at Oxford Lord Goff 
had read and been very impressed by an article by FH Newark which argued against the separation of Rylands 
liability and private nuisance.13 Cambridge Water provided him with the opportunity to put this into practice. 
He closed the gap between Rylands and nuisance in two ways. First, by equating non-natural use with 
reasonable use he essentially established the rule as an application of nuisance to one-off escapes (a position 
later confirmed by the House of Lords in Transco). Secondly, he introduced the remoteness principle from 
The Wagon Mound (No 1) [1961].14
↵
As we have already indicated, ‘non-natural use’ had come to be interpreted so as to limit liability under 
Rylands where the courts felt it necessary or appropriate to do so. However, Lord Goff recognised that the 
addition of the foreseeability requirement would sufficiently limit the scope of liability, so there remained no 
need to do so with the ‘ordinary use’ test.
Pause for reflection
Why do you think the courts felt it necessary to try and rein in liability under the rule in Rylands? If 
the objective was originally to protect claimants (or society as a whole) from the negative 
environmental and other effects of industry, do such limitations seem appropriate? And for whose 
benefit do these limitations exist?
There has been some discussion as to how far the foreseeability test extends and about what exactly must be 
foreseeable—the harm alone or also the escape in the first place? Lord Goff’s opinion is not entirely clear on 
these points (perhaps a reflection of his priorities at the time), but the commonly held view is that it is not 
the escape that must be foreseeable, merely the damage resulting from the escape. As Joanne Conaghan and 
Wade Mansell point out:
authority for this position can be derived from the Rylands decision itself: Blackburn J’s allusion, for 
example, to ‘anything likely to do mischief’ suggests that the defendant must reasonably recognise 
the dangerous nature of the substance under his control but, having done so, he ‘must keep it at his 
peril’, implying liability regardless of whether or not he could reasonably have foreseen and/or 
guarded against an escape.15
13
14
p. 595
15
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 11 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Therefore, the correct question is: once there has been an escape, is the damage suffered by the claimant of a 
type or kind that was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of such an escape?16
Lord Goff also considered the ongoing position. There was still clearly PCE pollution affecting the well—once 
the testing of the water included tests for PCE, the problem was known. On this point, Cambridge Water 
argued that, even though the damage (pollution by PCE) may have been unforeseeable when it was spilt, it had 
clearly become foreseeable by the time the case reached the court, and the PCE was still escaping. Could the 
defendant therefore be liable for continuing escapes? Lord Goff dismissed this argument, holding that because 
the defendants could not possibly have foreseen the fact that the well would become polluted at the date of 
the spillages, strict liability for the damage (which became foreseeable later, but by which time nothing could 
be done to prevent the escapes continuing) should not be imposed upon them. The PCE had escaped beyond 
the defendants’ control (even though it would have been possible—but expensive—for them to clean up the 
water).17
Counterpoint
Before leaving Cambridge Water, consider the following passage from Conaghan and Mansell:
[T]he interesting question is not whether Cambridge Water was correctly decided but rather 
why the Law Lords chose to decide the case as they did. To some extent, the result can be 
attributed to good housekeeping instincts—Lord Goff considered that the application of a 
foreseeability criterion to the determination of liability in Rylands would lead to ‘a more 
coherent body of common law principles’ (at 76) … More generally, however, it is instructive 
to consider the broader social and political context within which Cambridge Water was 
decided. [Eastern Counties Leather] is judicially perceived as a model company which excites 
the admiration of right-thinking people. Mann LJ notes that it is of ‘high repute’ locally, 
taking a proper ‘pride in its history’ as a business which was first incorporated in 1879 (at 
56). Lord Goff commends the company’s ‘good standard of housekeeping’ and its ‘modern 
and spacious’ accommodation (at 63). Into this idyllic scene of industrial industriousness 
comes a European regulation which, for no demonstrable health reason, renders water from 
the Sawston borehole no longer ‘wholesome’ and thereby threatens the whole future of this 
well-established business with a damages bill of almost £1,000,000. Anyone could be 
forgiven for thinking that this offends justice and common sense, particularly in 
circumstances where the alleged polluters couldn’t possibly have known that their activities 
would have such expensive consequences … However the effect of placing the cost of 
pollution on Cambridge Water is equally disquieting—they will inevitably recoup their loss 
through raised water rates, but in what sense is it more just to require the residents of 
Cambridge to foot the bill?18
16
17
p. 596
18
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 12 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
In economic and environmental terms, then, the Cambridge Water decision favours industry over 
society (and distributive rather than corrective justice); the losses or costs are spread among the 
citizens who pay for their water. The question is whether this is a better solution than one requiring 
polluters to pay. An environmental perspective may reflect an entirely different outcome—making 
polluters pay is surely preferable to making society pay for both the environmental and social cost of 
industry, and may operate as a deterrent against future polluting practices. Lord Goff considered the 
environmental question—and whether this should be a policy consideration that weighed heavily 
against Eastern Counties Leather—but thought that the creation of mechanisms for protecting 
society from pollution was more properly the role of Parliament, not the judiciary through the 
development of one small rule in tort. Put simply, he believed that pollution should be regulated by 
public, not private, law.
It is also questionable just how much ‘development’ of the tort the imposition of liability on Eastern 
Counties Leather would involve. In Rylands, the defendant landowner could not possibly have 
foreseen that one potential consequence of his erection of a reservoir would be the flooding of his 
neighbour’s mine. The point was that despite the unforeseeable nature of the harm, he should be held 
strictly liable for it happening, as by building the reservoir he had assumed the risk of all harms that 
might be caused by the water escaping, whether foreseeable to him or not. Why should this be any 
different when we are faced with a modern ‘model company’?
Pause for reflection
Do you think that Cambridge Water was correct? Could it have been decided differently? Remember 
that the House of Lords found major disagreements on some points thought to be determinative by 
the Court of Appeal (which had found in favour of Cambridge Water). Does this mean the House of 
Lords was necessarily right and the Court of Appeal was necessarily wrong? You may like to consider 
the fact that although PCE was not known to have any deleterious health consequences to humans, it 
had, by the time Cambridge Water was decided, been found to cause liver cancer in mice.
Also consider what the damages claim in Cambridge Water was for. The costs incurred related to the 
finding of a new site for a water borehole and the sinking of a new well. What this means is that the 
old well was never cleaned up. Should there have been an obligation on one of the parties to clean up 
the PCE from the old well? If so, which party, and why?
Check our pointers <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-  
resources/horsey9e-chapter-19-pointers-to-pause-for-reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes? 
options=showName> on how to answer the questions posed in this ‘Pause for reflection’.
p. 597
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 13 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-19-3>.
19.4  Transco v Stockport MBC
The final requirement of Rylands comes from the House of Lords in Transco, which approved and expanded 
upon Lord Goff’s opinion in Cambridge Water. Dealing with what could be considered to be ‘non-natural’ land 
use, the law lords found that the provision of a piped water supply from the mains to a block of flats was a 
totally natural use of land. Transco now makes it even harder for claimants to establish a defendant’s liability. 
Not only will the ‘mischief test’ be harder to satisfy, the ‘non-natural use’ test will also be. The House of Lords 
noted the link between these two concepts and all five law lords thought that a correct redefinition or re- 
interpretation of ‘non-natural use’ should require there to be some use that is ‘extraordinary and unusual’ 
according to the standards of the day.19 Piping water to a block of flats in an urban area clearly does not fit 
this definition, therefore there would have been no liability in Transco on this point.20 Typically, Lord 
Hoffmann reverted to economic analysis, suggesting that the role of insurance in cases of this type was also 
relevant, saying that ‘a useful guide in deciding whether the risk has been created by a “non-natural” user of 
land is to ask whether the damage which eventuated was something against which the occupier could 
reasonably be expected to have insured himself’ (at [46]).
Pause for reflection
Should it matter whether the party was—or is considered by the court to ought to have been— 
insured? The question, when it comes down to economic analysis, is about which party is better 
placed to bear the costs. If Transco had to bear the cost, it could then redistribute this cost by 
increasing the prices paid by all its customers. Similarly, if Stockport MBC had to pay, an 
↵
increase in council tax for local residents would cover the cost. Similar points arise if we 
consider payment ‘in advance’, via the payment of insurance premiums. Do you think it should be 
councils who insure themselves against eventualities of this type, or the companies who provide the 
services (e.g. gas), usually in the interests of making profit? Or, more accurately, should citizens in a 
particular area bear the costs, or the customers of a profit-making enterprise?
Lord Hoffmann seems to suggest that if an occupier of land could have foreseen such an eventuality, they 
should (a) have insurance and (b) the use of land would be classified as ‘ordinary’ so the Rylands test would 
not be satisfied. This puts the insurance burden firmly upon occupiers (potential claimants). Put simply, on 
this view a claimant cannot say that they thought that there might be a risk of harm occurring, but they 
19
20
p. 598
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 14 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
chose not to insure, and then go to court seeking damages under the rule in Rylands. Lord Hoffmann’s 
approach, however, was not favoured by the other law lords and was in fact explicitly rejected by Lord 
Hobhouse (at [60]).
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-19-4>.
19.5  Standing and defences
19.5.1  Who can sue?
Cambridge Water seemed to move the Rylands rule closer to nuisance, with the addition of the foreseeability 
requirement. Indeed, this was Lord Goff’s intention. Only a few years later, the House of Lords’ decision in 
Hunter v Canary Wharf Ltd [1997] made having a proprietary interest in land a prerequisite to a claim in 
nuisance. This meant that the question arose as to whether this would extend to those taking claims in 
Rylands. It is clear that others have successfully claimed under the rule in the past (Perry v Kendrick’s 
Transport Ltd [1956]), though this was criticised in Read v Lyons. However, if the focus of both actions is the 
same, namely the protection of rights to and over land, as Lord Goff suggested, it would seem logical that the 
right to be able to take a claim would be the same for each. This position was confirmed by the House of Lords 
in Transco;21 therefore only parties with ownership or exclusive possession of the land concerned have 
standing to claim under Rylands.
Counterpoint
Following Transco it is clearly no longer possible to claim for personal injury under the rule in Rylands 
(in the same way that it is not technically possible in nuisance).22 This limitation has, however, been 
criticised by some scholars as being at odds with the House of Lords’ belief that there may be ‘a 
category of case, however small … in which it seems just to impose liability even in the absence of 
fault’ (Lord Bingham, Transco at [6]).
↵
Roderick Bagshaw argues that it is strange to limit the rule to damage to real property especially 
given that one of the reasons for the rule in the first place was as a response to a loss of life in a 
number of disasters. For example, Lord Walker in his speech in Transco refers to the Aberfan tragedy 
in which 144 people (including 116 school children) were killed when on 21 October 1966 thousands of 
tons of colliery waste from the Merthyr Vale Colliery slid down a mountain side above the village of 
Aberfan in south Wales, destroying 20 houses and the village school. To suggest (in the absence of 
21
22
p. 599
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 15 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
negligence) there would only have been good reason to compensate the property owners and not for 
the deaths and personal injuries of those involved seems extraordinary. This, however, is the result of 
subsuming Rylands within nuisance.
Watch our video ‘Rylands underwhelms’ in the context of its history and missed potential in the 
context of personal or environmental disaster.
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 19: Rylands underwhelms
Read additional commentary on this Counterpoint. <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-19-pointers-to-pause-for- 
reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes?options=showName>
It also appears that other losses are excluded from the rule, now it has been subsumed into private 
nuisance and (see section 19.6) more closely aligned with negligence. In D Pride & Partners (A Firm) v 
Institute for Animal Health [2009],23 for example, Tugendhat J excluded claims for pure economic loss 
from both nuisance and Rylands actions.
19.5.2  Defences
The initial defences available under the rule in Rylands come from Blackburn J’s original judgment. He 
indicated that there should be only three defences to the (strict) liability. These are outlined in Table 19.1.
Table 19.1 Defences to a claim under the rule in Rylands v Fletcher
Defence
Examples
Fault of the claimant 
or express or implied 
consent
Ponting v Noakes [1894]
The claimant’s horse died after it reached over a fence to eat poisonous leaves from a tree on the 
defendant’s land. The defendant was not liable as the harm suffered was due to the horse’s own 
intrusion
Escape caused by the 
unforeseeable act of a 
stranger
Box v Jubb [1879]
23
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 16 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Defence
Examples
A reservoir overflowed onto the claimant’s land, but this was the result of another neighbouring 
reservoir owner’s actions, over which the defendant had no control and of which he had no 
knowledge; the defendant was therefore not liable
Rickards v Lothian [1913]
The claimant’s premises were flooded due to a continuous overflow of water from a sink on the 
top floor of the building. This was caused by a tap being turned on full and the wastepipe 
plugged by the deliberate act of a third party. The defendant was not liable as he could not 
reasonably have known of the act so as to do anything to prevent the harm
Perry v Kendricks Transport Ltd [1956]
A disused motorcoach in the defendant’s car park was set alight by young boys, causing injury to 
a 10-year-old. However, it had not been left in such a condition by the defendant that it was 
reasonable to expect that children might meddle with it and cause the fire.
The act of the third party must be unforeseeable. If the defendant should have foreseen the 
intervention, the defence will not be established
Northwestern Utilities Ltd v London Guarantee Co [1936]
The claimant’s hotel was destroyed by fire after a gas leak ignited. It was foreseeable that works 
undertaken by a third party near the defendant’s gas mains might cause damage and require 
remedial work. It was therefore no defence to argue that the fire was caused by the acts of a 
third party
Escape caused by an 
‘act of God’
Nichols v Marsland [1876]
The defendant had ornamental pools on his land, which contained large quantities of water and 
which had been formed by damming up a stream that ran through his property. Extraordinarily 
high rainfall caused the banks of the pools to collapse and the escaping water destroyed four 
bridges on the claimant’s land. The court ruled that the defendant should not be found liable for 
an extraordinary act of nature, which he could not have reasonably foreseen
Greenock Corporation v Caledonian Railway [1917]
A concrete paddling pool for children had been constructed by the local authority in the bed of a 
stream, requiring an alteration of its natural course. An extraordinary level of rainfall caused the 
pool to overflow. Due to its construction, water which would have ordinarily flowed downstream 
flowed down a public street. The House of Lords held that such an event did not qualify as an 
‘act of God’
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 17 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
The defendant will not be liable where an escape happens solely because of natural causes, in 
circumstances where no human foresight or prudence could reasonably recognise the possibility of 
such an occurrence and take preventative measures. Arguably, however, modern technological and 
scientific advances render this defence largely defunct. Do you think that exceptionally heavy rains or 
violent winds would be unforeseeable today? What kind of exceptional situations would now be 
considered (after Greenock) an ‘act of God’?
↵
Blackburn J’s defences are not the only ones applicable to Rylands claims; others more familiar from 
nuisance can also arise. Statutory authority is the primary example and the approach to this is the same as is 
taken in nuisance.24 Contributory negligence and volenti non fit injuria are also applicable.25 The fact that 
defences are available at all is somewhat controversial—they essentially suggest that an element of fault 
resides in an area of tort that is supposed to have created strict liability. This, in our opinion, weakens the 
action’s potential use in environmental protection. The subsuming of the action into nuisance has also 
created doubt about its usefulness in the modern day and, as we shall see in the following section, it appears 
that to some extent any residual application of Rylands is edging closer and closer to a fault-based land tort.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-19-5>.
19.6  The nuisance/Rylands v Fletcher/negligence overlap
Lord Walker, in Transco, suggested that liability in nuisance (and presumably, therefore, under Rylands) 
‘overlaps with (indeed, is a sort of condominium with) that of negligence’ (at [96]). A series of cases supports 
this—that is, cases in which there is clearly fault on the part of the defendant, but where the harm is to the 
claimant’s interest in land and liability has been found in nuisance or Rylands.26 These cases started within a 
category known as ‘continuing or adopting a nuisance’, and refer to those situations where a pre-existing 
nuisance (created usually by a third party) was allowed to continue by the defendant, resulting in the ‘escape’ 
of something from the defendant’s land. Furthermore, in Burnie Port Authority v General Jones Pty Ltd [1994], 
the Australian High Court expressly incorporated the Rylands rule into negligence. In Cambridge Water, a 
foreseeability requirement—more familiar from negligence and considerations of fault—was added to claims 
in both private nuisance and under Rylands. Lord Walker, in Transco, thought that the scope of the action had 
been restricted by developments in negligence (at [99]). Thus, it seems that questions must now be asked 
about the role of fault within these types of claim, particularly in those cases that seem, on their facts, to 
straddle private nuisance and Rylands.
p. 600
p. 601
24
25
26
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 18 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Sedleigh-Denfield v O’Callaghan [1940] AC 880 (HL)
A drainage pipe on the defendants’ land had been constructed by the local authority without the 
defendants’ knowledge. When it was built, its end should have been covered with a grille or grate to 
stop debris blocking it and causing flooding. A grate had been provided but was put in the wrong 
place, rendering it useless. The claimant’s land was flooded and damaged on more than one occasion 
when the pipe became blocked following heavy rainfall.
↵
The House of Lords held the defendants (an order of monks) liable on the ground that they had 
‘continued or adopted’ an existing nuisance. While it was clear that the nuisance itself—that is, the 
problem—had been created by the local authority in its negligent construction of the pipe, the 
defendants had done nothing to rectify the problem. Because at least one of the monks was found to 
have known about the existence of the pipe, and the problem would have been easy to rectify, it was 
held that the defendants had not taken reasonable steps to stop the nuisance continuing.
This clearly illustrates what we mean by a claim ‘straddling’ the tort of private nuisance and an action under 
Rylands. The applicability of a particular action turns on what is categorised as the ‘nuisance’ or problem in 
the first place. If it is the pipe, this is an ongoing situation (at least, the risk created would be) and would fall 
in the private nuisance category. However, if it is the flooding of the claimant’s land then it could be viewed 
that the water, once accumulated behind the blockage in the pipe, had ‘escaped’, making this a Rylands 
situation. However, it also seems eminently possible that this is, in fact, negligence—the defendants did not 
act reasonably or failed to take reasonable steps to do something about the grate and the potential problem 
that the pipe could become blocked. This is clearly a fault-based consideration and shows how the three 
different tort actions overlap. Is what is being said that there is a duty to do something about a known and 
existing state of affairs, if it could pose a potential problem?27 If so, this is clearly breached by not doing so, 
and is what causes the damage complained of, subject to any foreseeability considerations. Conor Gearty 
argues that ‘[t]his was negligence pure and simple, confused by an ill-fitting and woolly disguise of 
nuisance’.28
The harm in Sedleigh-Denfield originated from a third party’s actions, but similar effects arise in situations 
caused by acts of nature. In Goldman v Hargrave [1967], a gum tree on the defendant’s property was struck by 
lightning. The defendant took what turned out to be inadequate steps to alleviate the risk that the tree would 
catch fire. The tree continued to smoulder, eventually igniting, the fire travelling to the neighbouring 
property and causing damage. The Privy Council followed Sedleigh-Denfield, finding the defendant liable for 
the damage, based on his knowledge of the foreseeable danger.29 Again, this seems both like an escape (of 
fire) and a fault-based consideration, aligning it more closely with negligence, and indeed the Privy Council 
treated it as such, though it refused to state whether the case could also be decided under nuisance.
p. 602
27
28
29
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 19 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
19.6.1  The ‘measured duty of care’
The cases in this area seem to involve an escape of one sort or another and without the added limitations to 
the Rylands rule would appear to be almost classic examples of the type of harm that Blackburn J imagined 
would attract strict liability. In relation to them a new term 
↵
of art emerged: a ‘measured duty of care’ in 
nuisance, in which positive duties are owed by landowners to act to prevent damage to others.30
In Leakey v National Trust [1980], a portion of a large mound of earth on the defendant’s ground collapsed (as 
exposure to weather conditions had weakened it over time), damaging two houses owned by the claimant 
which were situated at the bottom of the mound. As the defendants had long been aware of the effect of the 
weathering on the earth, they were found liable. Here, again, the Court of Appeal explicitly considered the 
relationship between nuisance and negligence in claims of this type, essentially coming to the point that the 
two actions were one and the same in these situations. We would add that given the ‘type’ of nuisance being 
considered, Rylands is subsumed in these claims as well, by virtue of the ‘escapes’ that cause the damage in all 
of them. The result of Leakey is that a claim can now be taken in nuisance or negligence, but cases since have 
tended to rely on nuisance, possibly because it is easier to do so than to go back to ‘duty, breach, cause’ 
formulations. It is also perhaps arguable that where the only harm is to amenity interests, the claim must by 
its very nature be framed in nuisance and, therefore, all claims of this type might as well be.31 However, at 
least where there is actual damage to property, the claims seem as though they would equally as easily 
succeed in negligence if framed in that way (see e.g. Holbeck Hall Hotel Ltd v Scarborough Borough Council 
[2000]; Lippiatt v South Gloucestershire Council [2000]; Bybrook Barn Centre Ltd v Kent County Council [2001]; 
Delaware Mansions Ltd v Westminster City Council [2002]; Vernon Knight Associates v Cornwall Council [2013]), 
yet all are considered nuisance actions. Indeed, in Delaware Mansions, Lord Cooke went as far as to say that 
the nuisance/negligence distinction in these cases ‘is treated as of no real significance’ (at [31]).
That said, in Lambert and others v Barratt Homes Ltd and another [2010], a local authority succeeded in its 
appeal against a finding that it should have prevented the flooding of the claimant’s land from surface water 
that accumulated on its own land by constructing a catch pit and drainage system for the water at 
considerable cost. This indicates that the scope of the duty may be used to limit claims even where a measured 
duty of care seems appropriate. As the accumulation of the surface water had in fact been caused by Barratt 
(by blocking a drainage ditch and culvert on land adjacent to the local authority’s)—and because Lambert 
could recover the entire cost of drainage work from Barratt in nuisance—the scope of the authority’s 
‘measured duty’ extended only to cooperation and to allowing others to facilitate the drainage of water from 
its land.32
Pause for reflection
Given the arguments made earlier, and the cases cited, do you think there is any continuing role for 
the action in Rylands, or would it be better to do as Australia has done and completely subsume the 
action into the tort of negligence?
p. 603
30
31
32
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 20 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-19-6>.
19.7  Where does Rylands v Fletcher fit today?
In Cambridge Water, Lord Goff questioned whether Rylands was best seen as analytically distinct from 
nuisance or if they should be viewed as two parts of the same thing. Even though the Rylands rule had 
developed out of a desire to protect landowners from the risks of isolated escapes from industry and other 
risky activities, he held that ‘it would … lead to a more coherent body of common law principles if the rule 
were to be regarded as essentially an extension of the law of nuisance to isolated escapes from land’ (at 306). 
In Transco, the House of Lords confirmed that Rylands actions should be viewed as a sub-species of private 
nuisance. This, to a large extent, ended a long period of uncertainty and academic speculation on the matter. 
Their lordships also reviewed the scope, relevance and application of the rule in the modern day and provided 
guidance as to its future application.
In particular the House of Lords in Transco:
rejected the suggestion that the rule should be absorbed into negligence as in Australia and Scotland;
rejected the suggestion that the rule should be more generously applied, confining it to ‘exceptional’ 
circumstances where the occupier has brought something onto his land which poses an ‘exceptionally 
high risk’ to neighbouring property should it escape and which amounts to an ‘extraordinary and 
unusual use of land’ given the place and time in which it occurs; and
clarified that only those with rights to land could sue, bringing the action into line with private 
nuisance, following Hunter, and confirming that no claim for personal injury could be brought under it.
Transco limits the rule in Rylands to a role in the protection of interests in land (as in nuisance). In so doing, it 
prevents it from taking on a broader role in ensuring that those who wish to indulge in ultra-hazardous (but 
socially beneficial) activities make appropriate provision for absorbing the inevitable costs of occasional 
catastrophes and environmental harms. In this respect, the function or purpose of this area of tort law as a 
regulatory system—if it ever had one—is lost.
The Rylands rule has always been difficult to rationalise, and particularly so in the modern day, where it 
seems largely unnecessary to hold on to it. It was judicially created to deal with dangers caused by large-scale 
building of reservoirs and other rapid industrial development, making it seem like an exception to nuisance 
through its dealing with one-off events via the imposition of strict liability. However, by the mid-1990s, as 
Cambridge Water shows, its impact and potential as a tool for environmental protection was constrained— 
again, a product of the time in which a Conservative government prioritised business concerns. Furthermore, 
many of the practices on which it may have impacted had, by this time, been regulated in other ways— 
reservoirs, for example, by then coming under the Reservoirs Act 1975. Sadly, things have not really improved 
following the reconsideration of the action by the House of Lords in Transco, as to all intents and purposes 
p. 604
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 21 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Rylands is now merely a form of nuisance and, as we argued in the previous section, potentially more 
accurately viewed as a sub-species of negligence. As a result, its deliberate differences from nuisance, 
including the ability to recover for personal injury and ‘wrongful’ conduct—as well as most of its 
↵
environmental potential—have either been lost or become (unintentional) inconsistencies.33 Roderick 
Bagshaw contends that:
[i]t is often asserted that ‘hard cases make bad law’, but Transco confirms that bad law is also easily 
made when a case is too straightforward. Perhaps it was because it was so clear to their Lordships 
that the claim should not succeed (the defendant’s activity being too commonplace, insufficiently 
risky, there being no escape and the claimant’s loss being easily insurable) that they allowed 
inconsistencies and controversial propositions to stray into their speeches. But given that very few 
claims rely on the rule in Rylands v Fletcher and Transco did nothing to encourage greater use of the 
rule, the main effect of these imperfections will probably be to challenge law students and textbook 
writers.34
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-19-7>.
19.8  Conclusion
In this chapter, we considered the rule from Rylands, a judicially created action allowing claims against those 
who allow substances to escape from their land and cause damage to others’ property. This rule was 
completely a product of the time—there were societal concerns about the effects of mass industrialisation, 
including, as in the case itself, the building of artificial reservoirs.
Due to its historical context, the rule has been (and can be) used only in limited circumstances and the 
primary bulk of case law comes from the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. But it should be 
remembered that the tort of nuisance was already in existence before Rylands, and this would allow people to 
sue for uses of land that interfered with their own interests on a more frequent or ongoing basis. It should 
also be noted that the tort of negligence emerged as a separate entity in the early twentieth century, and 
many of the cases brought under Rylands could, in some ways, be construed as negligence actions. These 
days, it is only those situations where a completely accidental escape occurs that could be said to fall outside 
the bounds of negligence.
The rule today is best understood through a trilogy of cases: Rylands itself, then Cambridge Water in the 
mid-1990s, followed by Transco early this century. These three House of Lords’ decisions have in their own 
way shaped the way the rule can be used, either by adding new requirements (Cambridge Water), or 
redefining the way the existing requirements should be interpreted (Transco). That said, there is potential— 
subject to its now stringent requirements—to use the rule to help to protect the environment from one-off 
p. 605
33
34
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 22 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
2
3
→
→
→
catastrophes, not in a preventative sense but perhaps with more regard to clean-up measures when things go 
wrong. Whether this was what was intended when the rule was created is debatable—it was more likely 
intended as a vehicle to compensate (wealthy) landowners than to protect the land itself.
The usefulness of the rule is certainly questionable in the modern day—it appears from Cambridge Water and 
also the nuisance case of Hunter that its scope (particularly as a tool for environmentalists) has been severely 
restricted. The rule has moved closer to nuisance (and negligence), with all that that entails, including 
requirements of foreseeability and 
↵
proprietary interest in land to be able to claim. In other jurisdictions, 
the rule has been swallowed by negligence. Without doubt, this is a rule now very limited in scope and 
application—potentially having more historical interest than practical application in the twenty-first 
century.
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
How could the action under Rylands be used to help to solve environmental problems?
Does the action under Rylands serve any useful purpose in the modern day?
Should we follow the Australian High Court and formally view the action under Rylands as a species of 
negligence?
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-19-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Answering the problem question
Consider again the problem question at the start of this chapter. Now having read about the topic, what 
would be your advice to Low-Price-Pumps?
Here are some pointers to get you started:
The first issue is whether Low-Price-Pumps has standing to take a claim (Transco).
Their first claim is for property damage to the pumps and the economic loss suffered because of the 
closure.
p. 606
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 23 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
They would need to satisfy the four criteria for a successful claim under Rylands, as modified by Transco, 
including establishing whether each harm is damage ‘of the relevant type’ and whether it was foreseeable 
(Cambridge Water), as well as whether Rack-and-Horse brought onto or accumulated something on its land 
that carried with it ‘exceptional’ danger.
Consider also whether, should the claim be otherwise successful, Rack-and-Horse might be able to avail 
itself of one of the defences to the Rylands claim.
If you need some more guidance:
See the annotated version of the problem with issues and cases to consider <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-19-annotated- 
problem-question-interactive>.
Check your answer against the suggested outline answer <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-19-answers-to-problem-question>.
Further reading
A good place to start your further reading is the chapter by AW Brian Simpson, which helps to contextualise the 
Rylands litigation. More up-to-date and insightful interpretations are provided in numerous other articles, particularly 
by Roderick Bagshaw and Donal Nolan, and an interesting discussion of the potential usefulness of the claim in 
relation to fracking is provided by Costello.
Amirthalingam, Kumaralingam ‘Rylands Lives’ [2004] Cambridge Law Journal 273
↵
Bagshaw, Roderick ‘Rylands Confined’ (2004) 120 Law Quarterly Review 388
Costello, Roisin ‘Reviving Rylands: How the Doctrine Could Be Used to Claim Compensation for Environmental 
Damages Caused by Fracking’ (2014) available at http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3058635 <http://dx.doi.org/  
10.2139/ssrn.3058635>
Nolan, Donal ‘The Distinctiveness of Rylands v Fletcher’ (2005) 121 Law Quarterly Review 421
Simpson, AW Brian ‘Bursting Reservoirs and Victorian Tort Law: Rylands and Horrocks v Fletcher (1868)’ in Leading 
Cases in the Common Law (OUP 1995)
Wightman, John ‘Liability for Landslips’ [2000] Environmental Law Review 285
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-19-web-links?options=showName>.
p. 607
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 24 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Notes
 
1. We have previously encountered the idea of strict liability in relation to defective products in Chapter 12.
 
2. That is not to say it is not argued—see e.g. Jalla v Royal Dutch Shell Plc [2020].
 
3. See e.g. Network Rail Infrastructure Ltd v Morris (t/a Soundstar Studio) [2004] discussed in section 18.3.3.3.
 
4. So, would the owner of the ornamental lake in the first scenario at the beginning of this chapter be liable to 
Horsechester Council? The question now will be whether the modern requirements of a claim under Rylands have 
been met—have they?
 
5. Though it is interesting to note that the reservoir bursting in Rylands—essentially an accident, albeit large-scale, 
causing only property damage—convinced the courts to act to create a strict liability rule. This stands in stark 
comparison to other ‘large-scale’ accidents and personal tragedies we have seen in tort (e.g. the Hillsborough Stadium 
disaster, see further section 5.6), following which the courts have sought to restrict liability. For more on the 
background context to Rylands, you might like to read this famous article by legal historian AW Brian Simpson, ‘Legal 
Liability for Bursting Reservoirs: The Historical Context of Rylands v Fletcher <https://doi.org/10.1086/467740>’ (1984) 
13(2) Journal of Legal Studies 209.
 
6. Have you now changed your mind about whether Horsechester Council would be able to recover damages from the 
owner of the ornamental lake? Similarly, would Racksco have any claim since the Transco decision?
 
7. Note also that the storage of tyres in this case was held to be a ‘natural use’ of land, meaning no liability could have 
arisen even if there had been an escape. See, however, LMS International Ltd and others v Styrene Packaging and 
Insulation Ltd and others [2005], especially [26]–[33].
 
8. Confirmation that personal injury claims can also be made in public nuisance was given in Corby Group Litigation v 
Corby Borough Council [2008], discussed in section 18.5.
 
9. Though this might be trespass.
 
10. cf Harooni and another v Rustins Ltd [2011].
 
11. Though note that the decision in Ballard was not about the reasonableness or otherwise of upstream use but was 
more a policy decision reflecting the fact that people downstream tend to suffer more from pollution.
 
12. Though the trend may now be back in the other direction: see Stannard (t/a Wyvern Tyres) v Gore [2012] and 
Northumbrian Water Ltd v McAlpine Ltd [2014].
 
13. FH Newark ‘The Boundaries of Nuisance’ (1949) 65 Law Quarterly Review 480.
 
14. Section 9.3.1.
 
15. Joanne Conaghan and Wade Mansell The Wrongs of Tort (2nd edn Pluto Press 1999) 144.
 
16. Might it be argued, therefore, that the factory owners in the scenarios outlined at the beginning of the chapter 
would be liable, unlike Eastern Counties Leather, as such pollution is foreseeable since Cambridge Water itself?
 
17. Note, then, that the decision goes against the environmental principle that the ‘polluter should pay’. See also Jalla 
v Shell International Trading and Shipping Co [2023].
 
18. Conaghan and Mansell n15 146–7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 25 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
19. Lord Bingham at [11]. Lord Walker agreed, also adding the word ‘special’ to the requirement (at [106]).
 
20. See also Ward LJ in Stannard (t/a Wyvern Tyres) v Gore [2012] who found that tyres are not ‘exceptionally dangerous 
or mischievous’ things and use of land as a tyre-fitting business neither ‘extraordinary’ nor ‘unusual’ (at [50]), and 
Moore-Bick LJ in Northumbrian Water Ltd v McAlpine Ltd [2014] (at [19]).
 
21. See e.g. Lord Hoffmann (at [46]), in the context of who is best placed to insure against property damage, Lord 
Hobhouse (at [52]) who indicates that ‘other parts of the law of torts’ cover personal injuries and, perhaps most 
conclusively, Lord Bingham (at [9]).
 
22. In the past personal injury claims had been included without question: Hale v Jennings [1938]; Perry v Kendrick’s 
Transport Ltd [1956].
 
23. Discussed in section 7.2. Also see Colour Quest v Total Downstream UK plc [2010].
 
24. Section 18.3.4.1.
 
25. As was indicated in Colour Quest v Total Downstream UK plc [2010]. Jenny Steele argues that ‘consent’ in this form 
must mean something closer to ‘shared benefit’ if it is to be consistent with the purpose of the rule (Tort Law: Text, 
Cases and Materials (4th edn OUP 2017) 689). See further Chapter 10.
 
26. Steele states that Rylands ‘provides a direct alternative to negligence in some circumstances’, adding: ‘In terms of 
long-term survival, that has been its problem’ (n25 679).
 
27. In negligence this would be dealt with as a question of duty regarding the actions of a third party which then cause 
damage to the claimant—see, for an example of a case with no real discernible difference, Smith v Littlewoods [1987], 
section 4.5.4.
 
28. Conor Gearty ‘The Place of Private Nuisance in a Modern Law of Torts’ [1989] Cambridge Law Journal 214, 237.
 
29. Thus it seems that Horsechester Fire Service, in the scenarios outlined earlier, could also be liable.
 
30. Steele points out that the notion of ‘duty’ is alien to nuisance, but also that the analysis of these cases is not typical 
of negligence, either, due to their subjective rather than objective standard (n25 620).
 
31. Though as we have seen, to claim for personal injury, a claim would have to be formulated in negligence.
 
32. cf Vernon Knight Associates v Cornwall Council [2013].
 
33. e.g. the potential of a Rylands claim seems to have been lost in Jalla v Shell International Trading and Shipping Co 
Ltd [2023], despite the Supreme Court categorising the problem as a one-off escape.
 
34. Roderick Bagshaw ‘Rylands Confined’ (2004) 120 Law Quarterly Review 388, 392.
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
19. Actions under the rule of Rylands v Fletcher
Page 26 of 26
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
