15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 1 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0015
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter examines intentional interferences with the person, including the torts comprising trespass to the person— 
battery, assault and false imprisonment—the tort in Wilkinson v Downton [1897] and the statutory tort of harassment. The 
trespass to the person torts seek to protect an individual against an infringement of their personal or bodily integrity, that is, 
against the infliction, or fearing the infliction, of unlawful force (battery and assault) and the unlawful restriction of a person’s 
freedom of movement (false imprisonment). The three trespass to the person torts have the same characteristics: the 
defendant must have intended both the conduct itself and consequences of their action; the defendant’s action must cause 
direct and immediate harm; and they are actionable per se, that is, without proof of loss. The chapter also considers the tort in 
Wilkinson v Downton, which provides a remedy for physical and psychiatric harm deliberately caused by a false statement, and 
the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, which imposes both civil and criminal liability for harassing conduct.
Keywords: 
Keywords, tort law, battery, assault, false imprisonment, Wilkinson v Downton, physical harm, psychiatric harm, 
protection from harassment, liability
Problem question
Read this problem question carefully and keep it in mind while you are working through the 
chapter that follows. At the end of the chapter you will be able to apply what you have learnt to the 
problem question and advise the relevant parties.
Henry, Noah, Maeve and Quinn are sitting in the students’ union bar discussing arrangements for the 
forthcoming ‘Law Society Spring Ball’.
p. 403
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 2 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
→
→
Thomas, Maeve’s ex-boyfriend, walks by and says quietly to Henry, ‘I’ll get you! No one steals my girl 
and gets away with it’. Although Henry is not particularly upset by this, he decides to teach Thomas a 
lesson. When no one is looking, he deliberately trips Thomas up. Thomas falls over but is not hurt. He 
quickly jumps up and runs after Henry. Thomas hits Henry and pushes him away and Henry falls 
awkwardly and hits his head. As Maeve rushes to get a doctor, Thomas corners her and whispers, ‘I 
miss you, let’s try again’. She pushes him away.
Meanwhile Noah and Quinn have sneaked into the bar’s storeroom. Thomas later notices the open 
door, and without checking whether there is anyone in there, locks the door. It remains locked until 
Rafe, the barman, comes on duty some time later and unlocks it.
Later that evening, Thomas calls Catherine, Henry’s pregnant ex-girlfriend, who lives some distance 
away, and tells her Henry has been badly hurt. She takes the news very badly. Later that night, 
Thomas calls Maeve’s mobile; as she is still at the hospital with Henry she does not answer it. By the 
time she checks her phone she has 12 missed calls.
Advise the parties.
15.1  Introduction
Consider the following examples:
An infatuated student makes multiple phone calls to a classmate’s mobile phone suggesting that they 
meet up.
A man is shopping with his 3-year-old daughter in the toy department of a large department store. 
They are both locked in when the store closes for the evening.
↵
 A woman enters a lift with a male colleague at work. He sidles up to her, standing very close (but 
not touching) and whispers that he likes her dress directly into her ear. They are alone in the lift.
A man sends private sexual images of his ex-partner to her friends and family and threatens to put 
them online.
A doctor delivers a healthy child after performing a caesarean section on the mother without her 
consent.
All of these cases involve a possible infringement of an individual’s personal or bodily integrity. As such the 
harm lies not in whether the defendant’s actions have caused physical damage but rather in the violation of 
the claimant’s right to be free from unjustifiable interference. Trespass to the person is made up of three 
torts: battery, assault and false imprisonment. These were defined by Goff LJ in Collins v Wilcock [1984] (at 
1177) as laid out in Table 15.1.
p. 404
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 3 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Table 15.1 The trespass to the person torts
The trespass to the person torts
Assault
‘an act which causes another person to 
apprehend the infliction of immediate, 
unlawful force on his person’
Battery
‘the actual infliction of 
unlawful force on another 
person’
False imprisonment
‘the unlawful imposition of constraint on 
another’s freedom of movement from a 
particular place’
In addition to these three torts, this chapter also considers the tort in Wilkinson v Downton [1897]. While 
assault and battery provide a remedy for those who fear, or who experience, the immediate infliction of 
unlawful physical force, the tort in Wilkinson v Downton provides a remedy for those who suffer physical or 
psychiatric injury indirectly as a result of another’s intentional conduct. Though the House of Lords’ decision 
in Wainwright v Home Office [2003] and the enactment of the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 have 
limited its role, it appears more recently to have had something of a revival and the rule continues to offer the 
possibility of recovery for harm suffered in circumstances not covered by the trespass torts, the 1997 Act or 
the tort of negligence.
Pause for reflection
The torts which comprise trespass to the person have close connections with the criminal law and, in 
particular, the offences found in the Offences Against the Person Act 1861. Indeed, we might think 
that sulphuric acid being placed into washroom hand dryers, threats of violence at a parish council 
meeting, a car deliberately running over a policeman’s foot or harassment of a former partner are 
more appropriately seen as criminal offences.1 So why then does the law also recognise a civil action 
in these, and other, cases? And why would the victim wish to bring a claim?
↵
Think again about the purposes of tort law outlined in the introduction to the book. Many of the 
cases highlight abuses of, and discrepancies in, power—for example, between men and women, police 
officer and suspect, doctor and patient, and prisoner and the state. A civil action may, for example, be 
used to highlight a refusal of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to bring a criminal 
prosecution in a particular case or following an unsuccessful prosecution (see Ashley v Chief Constable 
of Sussex Police [2008]).2 Given the continuing low number of criminal convictions in cases involving 
rape and other forms of sexual assault, the civil law might be invoked here to strategic effect (see e.g. 
Lawson v Glaves-Smith [2006]; IMX v Bicknell [2024]).3 Do you think this would be a good idea? Think 
about the purpose of civil, as opposed to criminal, law as well as the remedies that are likely to be 
available.
1
p. 405
2
3
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 4 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
PLEASE NOTE: We explore the intersection of criminal and civil law throughout this chapter. A 
number of the cases we consider involve child sex abuse, domestic and intimate partner abuse and 
violence and/or sexual violence and assault. We understand that these may be upsetting to read and 
encounter. If you need to please do take a break and seek support from someone you trust.
Conventionally, the trespass to the person torts are described as having the same characteristics:
they must be committed intentionally;
they must cause direct and immediate ‘harm’;4 and
they are actionable per se, that is, without proof of loss. These characteristics distinguish the trespass 
to the person torts from the tort of negligence. Put simply, trespass compensates the claimant in 
relation to direct and intentional harm (e.g. being deliberately hit), while negligence compensates the 
claimant for unintentional or indirect harm (i.e. accidental injury).
15.1.1  A note on intention
It is worth noting at the outset that the term ‘intention’ is ambiguous. It can describe two different aspects of 
a person’s conduct. First, we can speak of intentional conduct, that is, willed, voluntary action. The contrast 
here is with conduct which was out of the defendant’s control—for example, a spasm or when they are 
physically manipulated by someone else. 
↵
Secondly, and more commonly, the language of intention is 
used in connection with the consequences of one’s willed actions—for example, to touch or hurt someone or 
to score a goal. In this sense, intention requires a particular state of mind or attitude in respect of the result of 
one’s conduct. Typically, one intends a particular consequence when one’s purpose is to bring about that 
consequence through one’s actions. The contrast here is with recklessness or negligence which involves, at 
most, an awareness of the risk that one’s conduct will bring a particular result without intending to cause 
such a result.
It is clear that the torts we are concerned with in this chapter require intention in the first sense. A defendant 
will not be liable if they were not in control of their actions at the relevant time. It is less clear if intention in 
the second sense is needed—that is, whether the defendant need intend the specific consequences of their 
actions (e.g. unlawful touching, or the claimant’s fear of such touching, in the case of battery and assault, 
respectively) or whether it is enough that the defendant was simply careless as to the possibility of the result 
occurring.
At one point it seemed that a trespass could be committed negligently (Fowler v Lanning [1959]). However, 
the Court of Appeal decision in Letang v Cooper [1965] marked a change in direction. In this case, the claimant 
(wishing to avoid restrictions imposed by the Law Reform (Limitation of Actions, etc) Act 1954, s 2(1))5 sued 
in trespass for injury caused by the defendant negligently driving his car over her legs as she sunbathed in 
the hotel car park more than three years earlier. In denying her claim, Lord Denning MR proposed that a clear 
4
p. 406
5
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 5 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
line be drawn between trespass and negligence: trespass requires that the defendant intended to touch the 
claimant, whereas ‘when the injury is not inflicted intentionally but negligently … the only cause of action is 
in negligence and not trespass’ (at 240).6
This position was endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Iqbal v Prison Officers Association [2009], which held 
that ‘it is well established that all forms of trespass require an intentional act. An act of negligence will not 
suffice’ (Smith LJ at [71]). However, Smith LJ went on to hold that intention here also includes subjective 
recklessness, that is where the defendant foresees that their actions will have the relevant consequences (e.g. 
the application of force in the case of battery, the deprivation of the claimant’s liberty in that of false 
imprisonment) and goes ahead with those actions nonetheless (at [73]). On this understanding, the person 
who throws a stone in a crowded area not intending (i.e. setting out) to hit anyone but knowing it is likely that 
someone may be hit will be liable in the tort of battery.
Pause for reflection
While Smith LJ in Iqbal does much to clarify the mental element needed for the trespass to the person 
torts, some difficulties remain. First, the use of the phrase ‘intentional act’ is unhelpful and 
potentially misleading. As we saw previously, intention can be used in two senses: to describe action 
which is voluntary (rather than involuntary) or to describe a person’s attitude to certain 
consequences of their action (that their purpose was to bring about those consequences). 
↵
So if A 
locks the door to a room, not knowing that B is inside, A’s locking of the door is intentional (in the 
first sense) even though A has no intention (in the second sense) to lock B in.
Because of this, saying there must be an ‘intentional act’ is ambiguous. We know from Iqbal that A 
does not falsely imprison B unless he intends to lock B in (or is aware that by locking the door he may 
lock B in but does this anyway). But then we would be better off making clear that what needs to be 
intended is the imprisonment—that is, A needs to lock the door with the objective of locking B in (or at 
least knowing that by locking the door this is likely to happen). Similarly, in battery what needs to be 
intended is not (simply) the defendant’s physical conduct—such as throwing a stone—but the 
application of force—the stone hitting someone (or knowing it is likely to hit someone and doing it 
anyway).
This relates to the other difficulty with the judgment: the view that subjective recklessness is a 
sufficient mental element for the trespass to the person torts. This aligns the law of torts with the 
criminal law offences of assault and battery, where it has long been clear that subjective recklessness 
is sufficient mens rea (R v Venna [1976]). Again, however, the courts could have made this point more 
clearly. In Iqbal, Smith LJ stated that ‘in the criminal law a reckless disregard of the consequences is 
taken as sufficient to satisfy the requirement of intention’, before holding that the same should go for 
the law of torts (at [73]). Not only does this misdescribe the criminal law, where the courts have 
repeatedly stressed the difference between intention and recklessness, but also it is clear that there is 
6
p. 407
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 6 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
a difference between trying to hit someone and doing something which one knows may hit someone. 
As such, the clearer formulation would be to say that trespass requires intention or recklessness, 
rather than pretending that recklessness is a type of intention.
15.2  Battery
A battery is the intentional application of unlawful force to another person: typically A stabs B; X shoots Y; 
Luca punches Mo. It is the ‘physical interference with’ or ‘invasion of’ the claimant’s body or person (Buxton 
LJ in Home Office v Wainwright and another [2001] at [67]). As we shall see, there is no need to show that the 
defendant caused the claimant actual harm or injury by touching them, or indeed that they intended to cause 
(or were reckless as to causing) them harm or injury. Any unwanted physical touching—from a pat on the 
back to a violent blow to the head—can amount to a battery. Nor does it matter why the touching occurred; 
the fact that the contact was the result of a practical joke or that it was intended to convey affection is 
irrelevant: ‘an unwanted kiss may be a battery although the defendant’s intention may be most amiable’ (R v 
Chief Constable of Devon and Cornwall, ex p Central Electricity Generating Board [1982] at 471).
Fortunately, this somewhat broad prohibition of unwanted conduct is qualified. In order to be unlawful, the 
force must exceed ‘physical contact which is generally acceptable in the ordinary conduct of daily life’ and 
must be applied to the claimant by immediate and direct means (Collins v Wilcock at 1177). An actionable 
battery therefore requires:
the intentional application of unlawful force (the touching or contact);
which is direct and immediate; and
for which the defendant has no lawful justification or excuse (i.e. no defence).
15.2.1  Intentional application …
The trespass torts are typically said to require intention on the part of the defendant. However, as we have 
seen, the word ‘intention’ can be used in different ways. So, the voluntary throwing of a stone is an intentional 
act, whether or not the thrower intends to hit anyone. What is clear is that there needs to be more than an 
intentional throwing. There is no battery unless the stone-thrower intends to hit someone with the stone or 
is, at least, aware that the stone might hit someone and throws it nonetheless. The mental element necessary 
for the tort of battery requires either:
an intention (i.e. setting out) to apply force to another person; or
recklessness as to (i.e. foreseeing the likelihood of) one’s actions causing the application of force to 
another person.
p. 408
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 7 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
There are two further points to make. First, if the defendant intends to make contact with A but instead 
touches B, the tort of battery will be committed against B. So, if Luca while trying to hit Will hits Catherine 
instead, she has a claim in battery against Luca by virtue of the rule of ‘transferred intent’ (Livingstone v 
Ministry of Defence [1984]). Secondly, the defendant will be liable to compensate the claimant for any harm 
suffered as a result of the unlawful touching even if he did not intend to cause the claimant harm, or the 
possibility of causing harm never crossed their mind. In Williams v Humphrey [1975], the defendant pushed 
the claimant into a swimming pool causing him to fall awkwardly and break his ankle. The defendant argued 
that he did not intend to hurt the claimant, but this did not matter. He had clearly intended to touch the 
claimant and there is no further requirement of intending any injury that follows. Similarly, a doctor who 
performs a medical operation without the patient’s consent will commit a battery, even though their 
intention is to help rather than harm the patient.
There is no a battery if the defendant acts involuntarily—for example, if Riley trips over and stumbles into 
Luca (though, if Will pushes Riley into Luca, he has committed a battery against both Riley and Luca (Gibbon 
v Pepper [1695])). However, a battery can be committed, even if the original action by the defendant was 
involuntary, if the defendant has the opportunity to stop inflicting the unlawful force and fails to do so. In 
Fagan v Metropolitan Police Commissioner [1969], a police officer was directing the defendant as to where to 
park when the defendant accidentally drove his car on to the police officer’s foot. Despite being aware of what 
he had done, the defendant deliberately left his car on the officer’s foot for a period of time, causing injury to 
his toe. The defendant was found guilty of criminal assault. Though Fagan’s initial—unintentional—action of 
stopping his car on the constable’s foot did not amount to a (criminal) assault, his failure to move his car, 
once he had knowledge of his car’s position and until the police officer had shouted ‘Get off my foot’ several 
times, did. Though this is a criminal case, the same reasoning would apply, by analogy, in the civil courts: the 
defendant’s failure to move his car also fulfils the intention requirement of the tort of battery.
15.2.2  … of unlawful touching
Applied literally, battery covers all forms of contact—with the result that someone would commit a battery 
simply by tapping a person on their shoulder to get their attention. It would clearly be nonsense if there were 
an actionable battery in such circumstances. 
↵
Nevertheless, whilst some limitation on the scope of 
battery is common sense, the courts have experienced difficulties in finding a theoretical basis as to where to 
draw the line between unlawful and acceptable ordinary everyday contact.
An early, somewhat narrow, attempt to distinguish lawful from unlawful touching was made by Lord Holt CJ 
in Cole v Turner [1704], who stated that ‘the least touching of another in anger is a battery’ (at 149). Thus, in 
Wilson v Pringle [1987], the Court of Appeal suggested that in order for the defendant’s actions to be unlawful, 
and for there to be an actionable battery, there needed to be ‘hostile intent’. The claimant, a 13-year-old boy, 
suffered serious injury to his hip when the defendant, a fellow pupil, pulled his school bag off his shoulder in 
an act of horseplay. The defendant’s liability turned on whether his actions had, as a matter of fact, been 
‘hostile’ rather than a schoolboy prank.
p. 409
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 8 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
This is not particularly helpful. All it does is restate the question that needs to be answered: what is hostile 
intent? In Wilson v Pringle, the Court of Appeal equates ‘hostility’ with ‘acting unlawfully’ (at 253). On this 
view, Edwin Peel and James Goudkamp suggest, hostile intent appears to mean ‘little more than that the 
defendant has interfered in a way to which the claimant might object’.7 But what is ‘hostile’ to one person 
may seem quite the opposite to another. When does an overenthusiastic slap on the back become hostile? And 
is, to use Lord Goff’s example, a surgeon’s mistaken, but non-hostile, amputation of a patient’s leg not 
therefore a battery?
A better approach is that of Goff LJ in the earlier case Collins v Wilcock [1984], who stated that touching will 
only amount to a battery where it does not fall within the category of physical contacts ‘generally acceptable 
in the ordinary conduct of daily life’ (at 1177). What is considered generally acceptable will depend on the 
context. So, while you wouldn’t expect to be pushed while in the queue at the Post Office, being jostled at the 
bar in a busy nightclub is more likely to be seen as something about which people cannot reasonably 
complain and so considered ‘generally acceptable’.
Although this approach was criticised as ‘not practical’ by Croom-Johnson LJ in Wilson v Pringle (at 252), it 
won the day when Lord Goff restated his views and rejected the hostility requirement once he had joined the 
House of Lords in the case of Re F (Mental Patient: Sterilization) [1990]:
it has recently been said that the touching must be ‘hostile’ to have that effect … I respectfully doubt 
whether that is correct. A prank that gets out of hand; an over-friendly slap on the back; surgical 
treatment by a surgeon who mistakenly thinks that the patient consented to it—all these things 
may transcend the bounds of lawfulness, without being characterised as hostile. (at 73)
Pause for reflection
In fact, Lord Goff’s notion of generally acceptable touching falls foul of the same definitional 
difficulties as Croom-Johnson LJ’s in Wilson v Pringle. What constitutes contact ‘generally acceptable 
in the ordinary conduct of human life’ is just as difficult to define as hostile contact. Consider, for 
example, the over-familiar male work colleague who greets everyone—male and female—with a 
‘friendly’ hug—does this constitute acceptable or unacceptable behaviour? Would it make a difference 
if the colleague was female?
↵
Joanne Conaghan and Wade Mansell may well think so. They argue that Lord Goff’s notion of 
‘generally acceptable conduct’ is open to feminist charges of bias, as male perceptions of acceptable 
conduct are hidden under a guise of neutrality, thereby precluding the recognition of women’s 
experiences and their divergence from those of men: ‘what men may see as a compliment, women 
often experience as an insult; what men offer as a gesture of intimacy and friendship, women may 
perceive as an invasion of privacy’.8 A woman who pursues a battery claim in circumstances that 
involve ‘minor’ touching, a ‘wolf-whistle’ (a distinctive two-toned whistle made to indicate approval 
of something (often a woman)) or similar, Conaghan and Mansell suggest, is likely to be regarded as 
petty or vindictive: ‘her sense of insult and embarrassment discounted as an “over-reaction”, 
7
p. 410
8
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 9 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
precisely because the original act is perceived as benign’.9 Do you agree? Conaghan and Mansell were 
writing in the late 1990s; do you think a woman bringing a similar claim in 2023 would have the same 
experience? Think about the impact of #MeToo and other campaigns on understandings of sexual 
assault and harassment.
15.2.3  Direct and immediate force
Finally, the unlawful touching must be the direct and immediate result of the defendant’s actions. A common 
example used to illustrate this point is the distinction between the claim of a person who is hit by a log as it is 
deliberately thrown onto the road and the claim of someone who later trips over it. While the former lies in 
battery, the latter is said to be restricted to the tort of negligence (Reynolds v Clarke [1725]). In practice, 
however, it seems the courts have interpreted the ‘directness’ requirement extremely flexibly. In Scott v 
Shepherd [1773], the defendant who had thrown a lit squib (firework) into a marketplace was liable in battery, 
despite the fact that two stallholders had caught the squib and thrown it on to protect themselves and their 
wares before it had eventually exploded in the claimant’s face, injuring his eye. Similarly, the defendant in 
DPP v K (A Minor) [1990], a schoolboy aged 15, was found liable for the injuries caused to another pupil as a 
result of his pouring sulphuric acid into the upturned nozzle of an electronic hand-drying machine, and 
which had subsequently been blown onto the pupil’s face, leaving a permanent scar.10 In both these cases the 
unlawful force appears to be a consequential rather than direct result of the defendant’s actions. Nevertheless, 
it appears that the shortness of time between the act and the contact is sufficient to satisfy the ‘direct and 
immediate’ requirement in battery. On this basis Alastair Mullis and Ken Oliphant argue that the directness 
requirement serves little purpose, and that it is likely that a person who trips over a log left in the road 
(assuming it happened relatively quickly after the log was thrown and the necessary intention could be 
established) would have a claim in trespass (as well as negligence).11
15.2.4  Lawful justification or excuse
Once it has been established that the defendant has intentionally touched the claimant and that the contact is 
both unlawful and direct and immediate, the defendant will have committed a battery unless she has a lawful 
justification or excuse for her actions. As these justifications and excuses are also applicable to the torts of 
assault and false imprisonment, they are discussed at section 15.5, after we have considered the elements of 
these torts.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-15-2>.
9
10
11
p. 411
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 10 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
15.3  Assault
Consider again the example of the woman in the lift at the beginning of the chapter. Clearly, there is no 
battery—but could the man’s actions constitute an assault?
Defined by Goff LJ in Collins v Wilcock as ‘an act which causes another person to apprehend the infliction of 
immediate, unlawful force on his person’ (at 1177), assault protects the claimant who fears or apprehends a 
battery. Unlike battery, the wrong of assault lies not in the unwanted physical contact, but in the anticipation 
of such contact. The tort of assault is committed where the defendant’s actions cause the claimant to 
reasonably apprehend the direct and immediate infliction of force upon their person. Assault and battery will 
usually, but not always, occur together: unless, for example, the assailant changes their mind, misses their 
target or a third party intervenes, the immediate anticipation of a battery (an assault) will almost always be 
followed by a battery (actually being hit). Thus, if Luca points a gun at Will he has committed an assault. It 
makes no difference whether the gun is loaded (assuming Will does not know this is the case) as he has 
reason to apprehend a battery (R v St George [1840]). But Luca will only commit a battery if he shoots the gun 
and hits Mo. If Luca’s aim is poor and he misses Mo, there will be no battery—but there will be an actionable 
assault. Equally, not every threat of a battery will give rise to an assault. If Luca says to Mo, ‘I’m going to shoot 
you dead’, but Thomas knows that Luca has no means of doing this, it is unlikely that Luca’s threat will 
satisfy the requirements of an assault. Similarly, if Luca shoots Will while he is asleep, his actions will 
constitute a battery, but not an assault.
An actionable assault requires that:
the defendant intends that the claimant apprehends the immediate and direct application of unlawful 
force;
the claimant reasonably apprehends the immediate and direct application of unlawful force;
for which the defendant has no lawful justification or excuse.
15.3.1  Intention
The same issues relating to the difficulties in establishing the meaning of ‘intention’ discussed earlier also 
apply here. However, it is clear that the defendant must have acted voluntarily, and have intended to cause the 
claimant to apprehend the application of immediate unlawful force, or be subjectively reckless as to the 
possibility that their actions will cause the claimant to apprehend the application of such force.
15.3.2  Reasonable apprehension …
For there to be an assault the claimant must reasonably anticipate or expect the application of unlawful force 
—that is, the infliction of a battery. Thus, if Rafe creeps up behind Luca and strikes him, Rafe has committed 
a battery, but not an assault. It would only be an assault if Luca knew Rafe was about to hit him. Conversely, if 
p. 412
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 11 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Luca sees Rafe coming and moves so that he successfully avoids Rafe’s blow, Rafe will have committed an 
assault but no battery. The test of reasonable apprehension is an objective one. It does not matter whether the 
particular claimant was overly timid or if they could have defended themselves successfully.
Stephens v Myers (1830) 4 C&P 350 Assizes
The claimant was chairing a parish council meeting, sitting at the head of the table. The defendant 
was also at the table with about six or seven people between him and the claimant. The defendant was 
asked to leave the meeting (he had become disruptive during the course of the meeting’s discussions), 
in response to which he threatened the claimant with violence, advancing towards the claimant with 
a clenched fist. Fortunately, his approach was stopped by the timely intervention of the 
churchwarden and he was never within striking distance of the claimant. The claimant’s 
apprehension of a battery was held to be reasonable and so the defendant was liable for assault, 
though the jury clearly thought the claimant was somewhat timid—their award of one shilling was 
trivial, even in 1830.
15.3.3  … of immediate and direct application of unlawful force
In order for there to be an assault the claimant must reasonably apprehend the infliction of immediate and 
direct unlawful force. If she knows that the defendant is not in a position to do this then there can be no 
assault: ‘It is not every threat, when there is no actual violence, that constitutes an assault, there must, in all 
cases, be the means of carrying that threat into effect’ (Stephens v Myers). This was confirmed in Thomas v 
National Union of Miners (South Wales Area) [1986], and by the Court of Appeal in Mbasogo v Logo Ltd [2006].
Thomas v National Union of Miners (South Wales Area) [1986] Ch 20 
(Ch D)
During the 1984–5 miners’ strike,12 a group of working miners sought an interlocutory injunction 
against the National Union of Mineworkers to prevent its members (who were striking miners) from 
verbally abusing and harassing them as they went to work. Each day a crowd of some 50–70 picketers 
gathered at the colliery gates as the working miners entered the workplace in vehicles surrounded by 
a police guard.
Dismissing their claim, Scott J held that the actions of the striking miners did not meet the 
requirements of immediacy or directness necessary to establish an assault: ‘the working miners are in 
vehicles and the pickets are held back from the vehicles, I do not understand how even the most 
violent of threats or gestures could be said to constitute an assault’ (at 62).
12
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 12 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
↵
However, this is not to say that there can never be an assault where the defendant lacks the immediate 
means to put it into effect. A bank robber who points a gun at the cashier and threatens to shoot unless his 
demands are met commits an assault—whether or not the gun is loaded—so long as the cashier reasonably 
believes that the gun is loaded and hence that the threat could be carried out.
Traditionally, the requirement of directness meant that threatening words needed to be accompanied by a 
physically intimidating gesture: ‘No words or singing are equivalent to an assault’ (R v Meade and Belt [1823]). 
Though a threatening gesture can be negated by words suggesting that an assault is not imminent. Thus in 
Tuberville v Savage [1669] there was no assault when the defendant placed his hand on his sword and stated, 
‘[i]f it were not assize time [that is, the time when judges from the King’s Bench were visiting] I would not 
take such language from you’. As it was assize time, he was, in fact, stating that he did not intend to strike the 
claimant. The key point remains whether the claimant reasonably apprehended the infliction of immediate 
and direct force. Circumstances in which the defendant’s words negate their threatening gestures are 
distinguishable from conditional threats where the claimant is merely given an option by the defendant to 
avoid violence. This is clearly an assault. It is no excuse for the highwayman (a robber who stole from 
travellers) to claim that his victims had a viable alternative option when he said, ‘Stand and deliver, your 
money or your life’.
Highwaymen aside, the reason for judicial emphasis on gestures rather than words, Conaghan and Mansell 
suggest, lies in a concern to ‘distinguish a mere insult (for which there is generally no legal remedy) from a 
serious and immediate threat’;13 to balance the conflicting interests of freedom of speech and public order. It 
follows, they continue, ‘that the harasser who makes obscene remarks, “amorous” proposals or embarrassing 
or intimate comments has traditionally not been significantly inhibited by the tort of assault from doing so. 
There is, after all, no harm in asking’14—though there may now be a claim under the Protection from 
Harassment Act 1997.
The House of Lords’ decision in R v Ireland [1998]—another criminal law case with applicability to the law of 
tort—ended any doubt over whether mere words could amount to an assault.
R v Ireland [1998] AC 147 (HL)
Three women had suffered psychiatric illness as a result of being subjected to a lengthy period of 
harassment by the defendant, including repeated silent telephone calls,15 often at night. Lord Steyn in 
the House of Lords rejected the proposition that an assault could never be committed by words alone: 
‘A thing said is also a thing done. There is no reason why something said should be incapable of 
causing apprehension of immediate personal violence, e.g. a man accosting a woman in a dark alley 
saying “come with me or I will stab you”’ (at 162).
p. 413
13
14
15
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 13 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Liability, therefore, depends on whether the claimant in the circumstances reasonably believed that 
the oral threat could be carried out in the sufficiently near future to qualify as an 
↵
immediate 
threat of personal violence. On the facts, the court was prepared to accept that silence would be 
capable of giving rise to such fears:
Just as it is not true to say that every blow which is struck is an assault … so also it is not true 
to say that mere words or gestures can never constitute an assault. It all depends on the 
circumstances … The words and gestures must be seen in their whole context. (Lord Hope at 
166)
Pause for reflection
Despite the saying ‘sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me’, this seems 
to require an unduly high level of courage by the recipient of the verbal threats. As Lord Steyn notes at 
the beginning of his opinion:
it is easy to understand the terrifying effect of a campaign of telephone calls at night by a 
silent caller to a woman living on her own. It would be natural for the victim to regard the 
calls as menacing. What may heighten her fear is that she will not know what the caller may 
do next. The spectre of the caller arriving at her doorstep bent on inflicting personal violence 
on her may come to dominate her thinking. After all, as a matter of common sense, what else 
would she be terrified about? (at 152)
Do you agree with Lord Steyn’s reasoning here? Would it make a difference if the calls had been made 
to the claimants’ mobile phones? Or by text? Or via Facebook or X? In these circumstances, the caller 
may not know the claimant’s precise location. Should this matter? After all, in such cases the claimant 
may still be significantly distressed or worried. Does the caller’s inability (subject to any evidence to 
the contrary) to pinpoint a claimant’s exact location (which, of course, could still be in their own 
home) make their fear of imminent and direct force unreasonable?
It may be that in such circumstances the claimant finds it harder to fulfil the requirements necessary 
to establish the tort of assault but, as we shall see, they may nonetheless still be able to recover using 
the tort in Wilkinson v Downton or the Protection from Harassment Act 1997.
15.3.4  Lawful justification or excuse
Again, even if the other elements of the tort have been made out, there will be no actionable assault if the 
defendant has a lawful justification or excuse for her actions.16
p. 414
16
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 14 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-15-3>.
15.4  False imprisonment
The tort of false imprisonment sits alongside battery and assault as the third in the family of torts comprising 
trespass to the person. Goff LJ in Collins v Wilcock [1984] defines false imprisonment as involving the 
‘unlawful imposition of constraint on another’s freedom of movement from a particular place’ (at 1177). As 
such, ‘imprisonment’ extends to any action 
↵
that deprives the claimant of their freedom of movement— 
so long as there is a complete restriction of this freedom and the defendant has no lawful justification or 
excuse the claimant will have been falsely imprisoned. Like the other trespass torts it is actionable per se. 
There is no need to show force, though a claimant must not be taken to be consenting to the imprisonment 
simply because they do not resist.
R (on the application of Jalloh (formerly Jollah)) v Secretary of State 
for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 4 (SC)
The claimant, a Liberian national named Ibrahima Jalloh, had been placed under an unlawful curfew 
after being released from an immigration detention centre on bail. These included a requirement to 
live at a specified address in Sunderland, to submit to electronic tagging and to stay at home each 
night between the hours of 11.00 pm and 7.00 am. This had lasted a total of 891 days. He sought 
damages for false imprisonment, arguing that he had been confined to his house without any legal 
basis for long periods of time. The Supreme Court, upholding the decision of the first instance judge 
and the Court of Appeal, agreed:
The essence of imprisonment is being made to stay in a particular place by another person. 
The methods which might be used to keep a person there are many and various. They could 
be physical barriers, such as locks and bars. They could be physical people, such as guards 
who would physically prevent the person leaving if he tried to do so. They could also be 
threats, whether of force or of legal process … In this case there is no doubt that the 
defendant defined the place where the claimant was to stay between the hours of 11.00 pm 
and 7.00 am. There was no suggestion that he could go somewhere else during those hours 
without the defendant’s permission. This is not a case like Bird v Jones where the claimant 
could cross the bridge by another route or Robinson v Balmain New Ferry Co Ltd where he had 
agreed to go onto the wharf on terms that he could only get out if he paid a penny. (Lady Hale 
at [24]–[25])
p. 415
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 15 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
Nor would the fact that the claimant had at times ignored his curfew (for example, to attend family 
court proceedings) make a difference to his situation while he was obeying it.
Like the prisoner who goes absent from his open prison, or the tunneller who gets out of the 
prison camp, he is not imprisoned while he is away. But he is imprisoned while he is where 
the defendant wants him to be. (Lady Hale at [26])
In order for there to be an actionable claim for false imprisonment:
the defendant must intend to completely restrict the claimant’s freedom of movement;
without lawful justification or excuse.
15.4.1  Intention
As Smith LJ held in Iqbal, false imprisonment, like the other trespass torts, requires an intentional act. 
However, as we have seen, this requirement is a little misleading. To use Smith LJ’s example:
If a security guard in an office block locks the door to the claimant’s room believing the claimant has 
gone home for the night and not realising that he is in fact still inside the room, he has 
↵
committed a deliberate act. However, he did not intend to confine the claimant. He may well be 
guilty of negligence because he did not check whether the room was empty but he would not be 
guilty of the intentional tort of false imprisonment. (at [72])
In this example, the fact that the locking of the door was intentional is not enough. The defendant must 
intend thereby to confine the claimant to that room. However, it is also clear from Iqbal that subjective 
recklessness will also suffice, so that there will be liability even where the defendant doesn’t set out to 
imprison the claimant, but he is nonetheless aware that this is a likely consequence of his actions. So if, in the 
previous example, the defendant locked the door suspecting (and not caring) that the claimant may still be 
inside then, though he doesn’t strictly intend to imprison him, he is nonetheless liable for false 
imprisonment.17
While the defendant needs to intend to restrict the claimant’s freedom of movement, it is not necessary for 
the defendant to intend to do so unlawfully. In R v Governor of Brockhill Prison, ex p Evans (No 2) [2001], for 
example, the claimant was lawfully imprisoned for various criminal offences. However, the prison governor 
miscalculated her release date with the consequence that she was imprisoned for longer than she should have 
been. Her claim for false imprisonment was successful, even though the prison governor clearly did not 
intend to hold the claimant for any longer than the lawful duration. Similarly, in Esegbona v King’s College 
Hospital Foundation NHS Trust [2019], the NHS Trust was found to have falsely imprisoned a patient for almost 
five months. Mrs Esegbona had suffered heart failure. After almost three months of treatment in the 
hospital’s Intensive Care Unit, she wished to return home. The doctors believed her to be confused and 
suffering from cognitive impairment and communication difficulties. A psychiatrist advised that there 
p. 416
17
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 16 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
needed to be an assessment of her capacity. The hospital failed to carry this out and safeguards under the 
Mental Capacity Act 2005 had not been followed. The patient was ultimately transferred to a nursing home. 
The court awarded damages of £130 a day—almost £15,000 in total.18
15.4.2  A complete restriction of the claimant’s freedom of movement …
As there must be a complete restriction of the claimant’s freedom of movement the conditions for the tort are 
not satisfied if the claimant is able to move in another direction (Bird v Jones [1845]; Hicks v Young [2015]).
Bird v Jones (1845) 7 QB 742 (QBD)
The defendant’s employer had, without permission, installed seating to view a regatta on the River 
Thames across the public footway on Hammersmith Bridge in London. Although this prevented the 
claimant using the footway, the defendants were not liable for false imprisonment as his freedom of 
movement was not completely restrained; he was able to turn back the way he had come: 
‘imprisonment is … a total restraint of the liberty of the person … and not a partial obstruction of his 
will, whatever inconvenience it may bring on him’ (at 742).
However, if the claimant’s freedom of movement is completely restricted, it does not matter how long this 
restriction lasts. This means that acts which are most immediately recognisable as batteries may also amount 
to false imprisonment—so, for example, if A rapes B, B will have a claim in battery, false imprisonment and 
(possibly) assault. In Walker v The Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis [2014], the Court of Appeal held 
that the claimant had been ‘technically’ falsely imprisoned in a narrow doorway by a police officer for a few 
seconds immediately prior to his lawful arrest (the police were attending a domestic dispute during which ‘all 
hell broke loose’ and there was a violent scuffle between the police officer and claimant):
It is not acceptable for an ordinary citizen to interfere with a person’s liberty by confining him or her 
in a doorway. Although the confinement was for only a few seconds, the principle in question is 
framed in terms of ‘for however short a time’ (Bird v Jones, Halsbury’s Laws). It is understandable 
that where liberty is in question … there is no room for complaisance. (Rix LJ at [30])
However, it was clear that the court was uncomfortable with the decision. Tomlinson LJ continued:
Mr Walker’s [the claimant] conduct attracts no sympathy [the trial judge had rejected his version of 
events in which he claimed the police officers had assaulted him as a ‘tissue of lies’] but that is of 
course often the way when a fundamental constitutional principle is at stake. The detention was 
indeed trivial, but that can and should be reflected in the measure of damages and does not render 
lawful that which was unlawful. The judge’s assessment of £5.00 as the appropriate figure was I 
think generous to Mr Walker, but there is no appeal against that assessment. (at [46])19
18
p. 417
19
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 17 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
A restriction on the claimant’s freedom of movement will not be considered ‘complete’ if there is a reasonable 
means of escape, so long as the claimant is reasonably aware of this. It also seems to be the case that where 
the defendant imposes reasonable conditions on the manner in which the visitor leaves his premises, these 
will be considered to amount to a reasonable means of escape and the restriction of the claimant’s freedom 
will not be considered ‘complete’. In Robinson v Balmain New Ferry Co Ltd [1910], the claimant had paid a 
penny to enter a wharf in order to catch a ferry but then changed his mind. He tried to leave the way he came, 
and claimed he was falsely imprisoned when he refused to pay the defendants a further penny to leave the 
wharf. His claim failed. It was reasonable for the defendants to 
↵
have the payment barriers on one side of 
the wharf, and, in any case, the claimant had known about the charge to leave when he entered the wharf.20
Pause for reflection
Of course much turns here on what is considered ‘reasonable’. Consider the following examples: a 
man has been deliberately locked in a room on the first floor of a building. The window is unlocked 
and there is a rope near it long enough for him to climb down safely—is this a reasonable means of 
escape to defeat a claim in the tort of false imprisonment? Would your answer change if there was no 
rope?
Check our pointers <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/  
horsey9e-chapter-15-pointers-to-pause-for-reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes?options=showName> on 
how to answer the questions posed in this ‘pause for reflection’.
This was taken further in Herd v Weardale Steel, Coke and Coal Co Ltd [1915]. A miner had descended into the 
pit at 9.30 am and was due to remain until the end of his shift at 4 pm. At 11 am, he refused to do certain work 
on the basis that it was dangerous, and demanded to be taken to the surface. His employer initially refused. 
He was brought to the surface at 1.30 pm, although the lift had been available to carry men to the surface from 
1.10 pm—which meant that he had been detained in the mine against his will for 20 minutes. The House of 
Lords held that the employer was not liable for false imprisonment. The miner had voluntarily entered the 
mine under a contract of employment and so was deemed to have (impliedly) consented that he would not be 
brought to the surface until the end of the shift:
p. 418
20
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 18 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
If a man gets into an express train and the doors are locked pending its arrival at its destination, he 
is not entitled, merely because the train has been stopped by signal, to call for the doors to be opened 
to let him out. He has entered the train on the terms that he is to be conveyed to a certain station 
without the opportunity of getting out before that, and he must abide by the terms on which he has 
entered the train. So when a man goes down a mine, from which access to the surface does not exist 
in the absence of special facilities given on the part of the owner of the mine, he is only entitled to 
the use of these facilities (subject possibly to the exceptional circumstances to which I have alluded) 
on the terms on which he has entered. (Viscount Haldane LC at 71)
Counterpoint
Paula Giliker and Silas Beckwith suggest that it is difficult to see Herd as anything other than a harsh 
ruling in favour of employers’ rights over employees.21 It is, they argue, scarcely legitimate to suggest 
that imprisonment is a reasonable response to the employee’s breach of contract. There is, however, 
another way of viewing the court’s decision: as a case of omission. On this view, there could be no 
liability because the restriction on the claimant’s movement was the result of an omission. The 
employers had not done anything to positively restrain the claimant; they had simply failed to provide 
him with a route out. As such, there could be no action for false imprisonment. Trespass is concerned 
with immediate and direct actions, not omissions—the employers had simply failed to do something 
they were not obliged to do in the first place.
↵
The view that false imprisonment cannot be committed by an omission was affirmed by the Court of 
Appeal in Iqbal.
Iqbal v Prison Officers Association [2009] EWCA Civ 1312 (CA)
The Prison Officers Association (POA) called an unlawful strike which meant that very few prison 
officers turned up for work. In light of this, the prison governor decided that prisoners should remain 
in their cells for the entire day. The claimant, a prisoner who was normally allowed out of his cell for 
six hours a day for work and recreation, brought a claim against the POA for false imprisonment for 
the period that he would usually be allowed out of his cell, there being no claim against the prison 
governor (at [21]).22
The Court of Appeal rejected his claim. The majority saw the central question as whether the prison 
officers could be held liable for an omission: their failure to release the claimant from his cell (both 
sides agreed that if the prison officers were liable then so too was the POA). They held that an 
omission could ground liability only if the defendants were under a positive duty to act in relation to 
21
p. 419
22
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 19 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
the claimant. Since, in their view, there was no such duty—the prison officers’ duty to release the 
claimant from his cell was a contractual duty owed to the prison governor and not the claimant— 
there could be no claim.
At least as a general principle, defendants are not to be held liable in tort for the results of 
their inaction, in the absence of a specific duty to act, a duty which would normally arise out 
of the particular relationship between the claimant and the defendant. Such a hard and fast 
distinction between action and inaction may seem arbitrary to some people, but it is not 
unprincipled, and, while it may lead to apparent injustice in particular cases, it does help to 
ensure a degree of clarity and certainty in the law. (Lord Neuberger MR at [21])
Sullivan LJ dissented in Iqbal on the ground that the POA’s action in calling the strike could not be 
sensibly considered a ‘mere omission’. It was a positive act (at [94]). And, as such, the claimant’s right 
not to be further restrained by the prison officers’ unauthorised action was infringed.
Pause for reflection
The extent to which, to use Lord Neuberger MR’s phrase, the ‘apparent injustice’ in Iqbal (and Herd) is 
outweighed by the need to ensure clarity and certainty in the law will depend on one’s views of the 
different interests of the parties. As Sullivan LJ notes, the prison governor’s response to the strike was 
‘entirely predictable’ (at [102]). In any industrial dispute resulting in strike action, third parties—here 
the prisoners—will often bear the brunt of the disruption. In the context of a prison, this is likely to be 
felt through the loss of the measure of liberty afforded to the prisoners by the governor as part of the 
prison regime. However, he continued:
in so far as there is a conflict between the prisoners’ right not to be deprived of that liberty by 
persons, including prison officers, acting otherwise than in accordance with the 
↵
prison governor’s authority, and the right of prison officers (absent any statutory 
prohibition) to strike, the former right must take precedence over the latter. While the right 
to strike is important, the right not to be falsely imprisoned is of fundamental importance. 
(at [103])
Do you agree?
Though it is necessary to show a complete restriction of the claimant’s freedom of movement, the claimant 
need not be aware of the restriction. Nor does the claimant need to have suffered any additional harm 
(beyond the restriction of their movements) from his false imprisonment:
p. 420
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 20 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
it appears to me that a person could be imprisoned without his knowing it. I think a person can be 
imprisoned while he is asleep, while he is in a state of drunkenness, while he is unconscious, and 
while he is a lunatic … Of course the damages might be diminished and would be affected by the 
question whether he was conscious of it or not. (Atkin LJ, Meering v Grahame-White Aviation [1920] 
at 53–4)
This was confirmed obiter by the House of Lords in Murray v Ministry of Defence [1988] (though in that case 
the claimant knew her freedom of movement was restricted): ‘the law attaches supreme importance to the 
liberty of the individual and if he suffers a wrongful interference with that liberty it should remain actionable 
even without proof of special damage’ (at 529). However, a person who is unaware of their imprisonment is 
likely to receive only nominal damages (see Smith LJ, Iqbal at [83]).23
But what if the claimant is not yet imprisoned, but the defendant has decided that if they attempt to leave 
they will be imprisoned? In R v Bournewood Mental Health Trust (ex p L) [1998], the potential deprivation of a 
claimant’s liberty was not held to be sufficient to ground a claim. In this case, a mentally ill patient was 
voluntarily held in an unlocked hospital ward—the staff at the hospital had agreed that should he try to leave 
he would be detained compulsorily under the Mental Health Act 1983. This is indeed what happened. A bare 
majority of the House of Lords overruled a unanimous Court of Appeal and dismissed the patient’s claim for 
false imprisonment in relation to the period prior to his compulsory detention. There was, they concluded, no 
imprisonment until the claimant was in fact detained under the Mental Health Act; an agreement to imprison 
the claimant was not the same as actually imprisoning him.
This rationalisation is, to say the least, somewhat difficult to grasp. The decision is certainly at odds with that 
in Meering. In both cases, the imprisonment consisted in the certainty that total restraint would have been 
enforced had either of the claimants tried to leave, even though neither had the knowledge that this would 
happen. As Lord Steyn noted in dissent in Bournewood, the idea that the claimant could go free seems 
something of a ‘fairy tale’ (at 475), nevertheless he, and Lord Nolan who also dissented, both agreed with the 
majority that the defendant’s actions were justified by the necessity principle. Given the 
↵
unanimous 
recognition of a violation and lack of adequate protection of the claimant’s Article 5 right (right to liberty and 
security) by the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in HL v UK [2004] at [91] and that the 
circumstances in which a mentally ill patient can be detained have been clarified by the Mental Capacity Act 
2005, it is unlikely that the majority’s decision in Bournewood would be followed, in this context, in future (P 
v Cheshire West and Chester Council; P and Q v Surrey County Council [2014]). Indeed, as Lady Hale notes in 
Jalloh: ‘So far as is known, Bournewood is the only example of a deprivation of liberty which did not amount to 
imprisonment at common law: generally speaking, one may well be imprisoned without being deprived of 
one’s liberty, but the other way round is harder to envisage’ (at [23]).
15.4.3  … without legal authorisation
The essence of false imprisonment is the restriction of an individual’s freedom of movement without lawful 
justification or excuse. What amounts to a lawful justification or excuse is explored further in section 15.5. 
However, unlike the torts of battery and assault the tort of false imprisonment has a strong constitutional 
23
p. 421
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 21 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
element, which is worth exploring separately. In particular, where the defendant is a public authority (under 
the Human Rights Act (HRA) 1998), a claim for false imprisonment may coexist with one in respect of Article 
5 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).
An example of this is the case of Austin and other v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2009]. This case 
was brought in response to a police cordon on Oxford Street, London on 1 May 2001, which restricted the 
movement of some 3,000 people. The police had imposed the cordon after a large number of demonstrators— 
so-called ‘May Day’ protesters, some of whom were violent, had converged at Oxford Circus. The claimant 
was caught within the cordon and was prevented from leaving for several hours. She brought claims for false 
imprisonment and a breach of her right to liberty under Article 5 ECHR. The House of Lords held that there 
had been no infringement of the claimant’s Article 5 right. The police’s actions in seeking to ensure crowd 
control had been resorted to in good faith, were proportionate and were not enforced any longer than was 
reasonably necessary (at [37]).24 Austin subsequently took her case to the ECtHR. Despite heavy criticism of 
the House of Lords’ decision in Austin by commentators and academics, the majority of the Grand Chamber of 
the ECtHR agreed that:
in the circumstances the imposition of an absolute cordon was the least intrusive and most effective 
means to be applied … [but continued] that measures of crowd control should not be used by the 
national authorities directly or indirectly to stifle or discourage protest, given the fundamental 
importance of freedom of expression and assembly in all democratic societies. Had it not remained 
necessary for the police to impose and maintain the cordon in order to prevent serious injury or 
damage, the ‘type’ of the measure would have been different, and its coercive and restrictive nature 
might have been sufficient to bring it within Article 5. (Austin and other v UK [2012] at [66], [68])
↵
In most cases of false imprisonment, the claimant would otherwise be free to go wherever they please. 
But what about a person who is lawfully imprisoned—can they be falsely imprisoned in relation to acts 
subsequent to their lawful imprisonment? It is clear that if a prisoner is ‘imprisoned’ by another prisoner 
within the confines of the prison (or by a prison officer acting in bad faith), they will be able to bring an 
action for false imprisonment (Ex p Hague at 164), but what about where, for example, a prison governor 
makes a mistake or breaches the Prison Rules? In R v Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison, ex p Hague [1992] 
the House of Lords held that the claimant, a category A prisoner, was unable to establish a claim for false 
imprisonment against the prison governor in relation to his continued segregation following a prison 
transfer (in breach of the Prison Rules) as to do so would be to confuse the fact of confinement (the essence of 
a claim of false imprisonment) with the conditions of confinement (which fall outside the remit of the tort). 
This is surprising. One might expect that a breach of the Prison Rules would negate the prison governor’s 
statutory authority, thereby rendering lawful imprisonment unlawful. It is likely that the court was mindful 
of a desire to limit claims from disgruntled prisoners for technical breaches of the Rules.25 A similar issue was 
considered by the Supreme Court in R (on the application of Lumba) v Secretary of State for the Home 
Department [2011].
24
p. 422
25
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 22 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
R (on the application of Lumba) v Secretary of State for the Home De-
partment [2011] UKSC 12 (SC)
The claimant was a foreign national prisoner (FNP) serving a four-year prison sentence in the UK. In 
April 2006, the Home Secretary notified him that on the conclusion of his sentence, he would be 
deported, and that he would be detained pending deportation. As a result, the claimant, who was due 
to be released from prison in June 2006, remained in custody until he left the UK voluntarily in 
February 2011. The claimant brought a claim for false imprisonment for the period of detention 
following the completion of his prison sentence on the basis that the Home Secretary had detained 
him without lawful authority to do so. During the relevant period, despite a published policy stating 
that there was a presumption in favour of a FNP’s release, pending a final decision relating to their 
deportation, in fact decisions had been made on the basis of an unpublished policy which operated on 
the opposite presumption, that is in favour of detention. The key issues for the court to determine 
were (a) whether the unpublished policy was unlawful; (b) if so, whether the detention on the basis of 
this policy amounted to false imprisonment where a FNP would have been lawfully detained in any 
event (as was the case here); and (c) if it was unlawful, what was the appropriate measure and award 
of damages.
The Supreme Court unanimously held that it was unlawful for the Secretary of State to maintain an 
unpublished policy which was inconsistent with the published policy and which applied a near 
blanket on the release of a FNP prior to deportation. Secondly, the court held that though a breach of a 
public law duty was capable of rendering the detention unlawful, not all forms of public law 
unlawfulness will ground a claim. Nevertheless, in this case, the majority (6:3) found 
↵
the Home 
Secretary liable in the tort of false imprisonment on the basis that the statutory power used to detain 
the claimant was exercised in breach of her public law duties:
all that the claimant has to do is to prove that he was detained. The Secretary of State must 
prove that the detention was justified in law. She cannot do this by showing that, although 
the decision to detain was tainted by public law error … a decision to detain free from error 
could and would have been made. (Lord Dyson at [88])
However, the fact that the claimant would have been detained whichever policy was applied was, the 
majority held, relevant when determining the issue of damages. Here the Justices were split. While 
Lords Dyson, Kerr and Collins’s view was that, since the claimant had suffered no loss, only nominal 
damages of £1 should be awarded, the other Justices, in favour of an award, thought that it should be 
either £1,000 or £500 in order to underline the serious and ‘deplorable’ abuse of power (Lord Hope at 
[176]) and ‘to recognise that the claimant’s fundamental constitutional rights have been breached by 
the state and to encourage all concerned to avoid anything like it happening again’ (Lady Hale at 
[218]). On the basis that the three dissenting judges (who would not have awarded anything) would 
go for the lowest award, this left the award of £1 in the majority (6:3).26
p. 423
26
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 23 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Things are slightly more complicated in relation to cases where a police officer ‘detains’ a suspect (without 
arresting them) on the basis of a ‘reasonable suspicion’, which might justify the detention. In such cases, the 
burden of proof is on the claimant to show that the defendant’s exercise of discretion was unreasonable (Chief 
Constable of Thames Valley Police v Earl Gideon Foster Hepburn [2002]; Brooks v Commissioner of Police for the 
Metropolis [2005]). In Parker v Chief Constable of Essex Police [2018], Michael Parker, better known as Michael 
Barrymore, a TV personality, brought a claim for false imprisonment following his unlawful arrest in relation 
to the death of Mr Lubbock at his house in 2001. He sought £2.4 million, assessed on the basis that he was re- 
establishing his career following the publicity which flowed from Mr Lubbock’s death but that, after his 
arrest, this became impossible. Leveson P held that although the actual arrest was unlawful (on the basis that, 
in the events which obtained, the arresting officer did not personally have reasonable grounds for the 
necessary suspicion to justify arrest as required by s 24(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 
(PACE)), ‘there were reasonable grounds both to suspect Mr Parker of committing an offence and that it was 
necessary to arrest him. … [And] that had things been done as they should have been done (to quote Lady 
Hale in Kambadzi), a lawful arrest would have been effected’ (at [132]). As a result, Parker was only entitled to 
nominal damages, not the £2.4 million he was asking for.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-15-4>.
15.5  Defences: Lawful justification or excuse
A common element of each of the trespass torts is that the defendant must not have a lawful justification or 
excuse for their actions. As seen in the earlier discussion of statutory authority,27 this usually operates as a 
defence to a claim, with the onus being on the defendant to establish that they can justify or excuse their 
actions. In this section, we consider three further defences that typically arise in this context—consent, 
necessity and self-defence.28
15.5.1  Consent
The tort of battery potentially covers all forms of contact, subject to the requirement that the contact exceeds 
that which is generally acceptable in everyday life. However, the scope of battery (as well as the torts of 
assault and false imprisonment) is also limited through the mechanism (or defence) of consent. There is no 
battery when the claimant consents to the direct and immediate application of force by the defendant. If, for 
example, Riley consents to being kissed by Isla, they cannot later sue her for a battery—their consent 
provides Isla with a lawful justification or excuse for her action. Similarly, there will be no false 
imprisonment or assault if you consent to being tied up and threatened, say as part of a role-play or acting 
class.29 Nor, it seems, in some cases, where you are so intoxicated you are unable to make an informed choice, 
as in the colourful case of Pile v Chief Constable of Merseyside Police [2020]. The claimant had been arrested for 
being drunk and disorderly and at some point during the evening she, in the words of Turner J:
p. 424
27
28
29
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 24 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
had emptied the contents of her stomach all over herself and was too insensible with drink to have 
much idea of either where she was or what she was doing there. Rather than leave the vulnerable 
claimant to marinade overnight in her own bodily fluids, four female police officers removed her 
outer clothing and provided her with a clean dry outfit to wear. The claimant was so drunk that she 
later had no recollection of these events. (at [1])
The claimant suggested that this amounted to an actionable trespass to the person (as well as a breach of her 
Article 8 rights (right to private and family life)). This was rejected by the trial judge. Dismissing the 
claimant’s appeal, Turner J held:
Where someone is so intoxicated that she is unable to make an informed choice then circumstances 
will arise in which a police officer can readily assume that consent to the removal of clothing can be 
implied. Normally, someone in custody who has vomited all over themselves, but lacks the ability to 
articulate their preference, may be safely taken to have given implied consent to the removal of their 
outer clothing and its replacement by clean clothing so long as all reasonable considerations of 
safety and the preservation of dignity have been taken into account. (at [37])
Pause for reflection
Turner J continued:
I note, although it forms no part of my reasoning, that some members of the public may well 
have found it to have been a grotesque result if a woman who: has rendered herself 
insensible through drink; abused an innocent taxi driver; behaved aggressively to police 
officers trying to do their job and vomited all over herself should then be found to be entitled 
to compensation because those same officers, as an act of decency, had then changed her 
into clean and dry clothing at a time when she was too drunk to know or care. (at [38])
Do you agree? Should a claimant’s behaviour really make a difference as to whether there is an 
actionable tort? Or if they are able to recover damages?
The burden of proving consent rests on the claimant.30 It is clear that the consent must be genuine and 
sincerely given and that is not induced by fraud or misrepresentation (Appleton v Garett [1995]). In R v 
Williams [1923], for example, a singing teacher was found guilty of raping a naïve claimant who had 
‘consented’ to his actions on the basis of his false assertion that his conduct would improve her singing voice. 
Her consent was invalid on the basis that she had not really understood what was happening. Issues relating 
to consent often arise in the context of medical treatment. A doctor does not commit a battery when 
operating on or treating a patient if the patient has given valid consent to the treatment. Of course, this 
p. 425
30
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 25 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
simply prompts a second question: when is a patient’s consent valid? An answer to this is found in Chatterton 
v Gerson [1981], in which the court ruled that a patient’s consent to an operation was valid, despite the fact 
that she had not been fully informed of the risks, because she broadly understood the nature of the operation:
[O]nce the patient was informed in broad terms of the nature of the procedure which is intended, 
and gives her consent, that consent is real, and the cause of the action on which to base a claim for 
failure to go into risks and implications is negligence, not trespass. (at 443)31
But what about where a claimant refuses to give consent? If an individual is able to consent to what would 
otherwise be a battery, surely it follows that there is a corresponding ability to refuse consent to such actions? 
Consider again the example of a doctor who delivers a healthy child after performing a caesarean section on 
the mother without her consent. Does—or should—she have an action against the doctor in battery? The law 
is clear that an individual has an absolute right to the inviolability of their body:
[A]n adult patient who … suffers from no mental incapacity has an absolute right to choose whether 
to consent to medical treatment, to refuse it, or to choose one rather than another of 
↵
the 
treatments being offered. This right of choice is not limited to decisions which others might regard 
as sensible. (Lord Donaldson MR, Re T (Adult: Refusal of Treatment) [1993] at 102)
A competent adult may therefore withhold their consent to any treatment (including the provision of food if 
provided by an intravenous tube or similar) even if said treatment is in their best interests, is necessary to 
save their life or, somewhat more controversially, the life of their unborn child (Re MB (Caesarean Section) 
[1997] at 533). This common law position—and the test of capacity more broadly—has been enshrined in 
statute (for those over 16) in the Mental Capacity Act 2005.32
Mental Capacity Act 2005, s 1
A person must be assumed to have capacity unless it is established that he lacks 
capacity.
A person is not to be treated as unable to make a decision unless all practicable steps 
to help him to do so have been taken without success.
A person is not to be treated as unable to make a decision merely because he makes 
an unwise decision.
An act done, or decision made, under this Act for or on behalf of a person who lacks 
capacity must be done, or made, in his best interests.
Before the act is done, or the decision is made, regard must be had to whether the 
purpose for which it is needed can be as effectively achieved in a way that is less 
restrictive of the person’s rights and freedom of action.
31
p. 426
32
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 26 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
A doctor can only treat a patient in the absence of consent where a patient is unable to consent, that is, they 
lack the capacity to make such a decision themselves. To determine when a patient will lack capacity, it is 
useful here to adopt Shaun Pattinson’s explanation of sections 2 and 3 of the 2005 Act as setting out a two- 
stage test.33 A patient will only be considered to lack capacity if both stages of the test are met. First, the 
patient must be suffering from an ‘impairment of, or a disturbance in the functioning of, the mind or brain’, 
which means they are unable to make a decision for themselves (s 2). This may be temporary or long term, 
and caused by a number of factors including mental illness, brain injury or alcohol or drug abuse. Secondly, 
the patient will be considered unable to make a decision if the doctor reasonably believes, and takes 
reasonable steps to ensure (as required by s 5), that the patient is unable to meet any of the requirements of 
section 3(1): (a) to understand the information relevant to the decision; (b) to retain that information; (c) to 
use or weigh that information as part of the process of making the decision; or (d) to communicate his 
decision (whether by talking, using sign language or any other means). Where this test is satisfied, a doctor 
will not incur liability so long as they reasonably believe that the treatment or procedure is in the patient’s 
‘best interests’ (ss 4 and 5).
By contrast, it follows that where a patient is able to, for example, understand the information relevant to the 
decision, they have the capacity to make decisions about how they are to be treated and to give—and 
withhold—their consent and the doctor who operates or treats them will commit a battery.
Counterpoint
The 2005 Act, like the common law, places considerable emphasis on the doctor’s belief in the 
patient’s capacity. Despite judicial rhetoric upholding an individual’s right to self-determination, in 
cases where medical treatment is necessary to save the life of a woman and the foetus she is carrying, 
the case law suggests that the former’s refusal to consent to medical intervention is less than likely to 
be considered valid.34 Re MB (Caesarean Section) [1997] is a case in point. In this case, the claimant 
consented to a caesarean section but withheld consent in relation to an accompanying medical 
procedure, without which the caesarean section could not be performed. The court held that, in 
continuing with the procedures, the doctor had not committed a battery. The claimant’s withholding 
of consent was held to be invalid, because she was found to be suffering from an impairment or 
disturbance of mental functioning (due to a fear of needles). Of course, the reality of the situation was 
that if the doctors had not intervened, the claimant and the foetus would have died. Nevertheless, an 
individual’s right to make bad decisions is recognised in both common and statute law—how far do 
you think this should extend to decisions which would negatively impact on the life of the foetus?35
15.5.2  Necessity
Where a claimant is unable to consent, a defendant might rely on the limited common law defence of 
necessity.36 This solves a practical problem experienced by, for example, the emergency services and other 
medical professionals where an unconscious patient is incapable of consenting to necessary medical 
33
p. 427
34
35
36
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 27 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
treatment. On this basis, where a patient is unconscious but otherwise competent, and not known to object to 
the treatment, doctors may intervene in the best interests of the patient (Re F; F v West Berkshire Health 
Authority [1990]). The defence was also used in cases of permanent incapacity, for example where the patient 
is in a coma or mentally ill (e.g. Airedale NHS Trust v Bland [1993]).
Again, the common law in relation to this has been codified by the Mental Capacity Act 2005. A medical 
professional will not incur liability for treating a patient who is temporarily or permanently incapacitated, so 
long as before doing so they take reasonable steps to establish, and reasonably believe, that the patient lacks 
capacity and the treatment or procedure is in the patient’s ‘best interests’ (s 5). Where the patient’s lack of 
capacity is only temporary—due to shock or anger or as a result of an accident—the medical professional 
may treat the patient in accordance with their best interests, though they should also take into account when 
the person is likely to regain capacity in relation to the matter in question and, if possible, wait until the 
patient has regained capacity before continuing with further treatment (s 4).
15.5.3  Self-defence
Finally, the defendant may be able to argue that they acted in self-defence. However, unlike the defendant in 
criminal proceedings who simply needs an honest belief (even if that belief is unreasonable) that they were 
about to be attacked, the tort defendant’s belief must be not only honest but also reasonable (Ashley v Chief 
Constable of West Sussex Police [2008]). Moreover, it has long been established that the defendant’s actions 
must be proportionate to the force (about to be) exerted against them. Thus, in Cockcroft v Smith [1705], the 
claimant’s act of running with his finger extended towards the defendant’s eyes did not justify the 
defendant’s action of biting off part of the offending finger. Similarly, in Lane v Holloway [1968] the 
defendant’s severe blow to the claimant’s eye was out of proportion to the claimant’s punch to his shoulder. 
Lane is also authority for the proposition that provocation is not a valid defence in relation to cases of trespass 
to the person.
However, Lane can be contrasted with the decision in Cross v Kirkby [2000]. Here a farmer, having been struck 
by a hunt saboteur with a baseball bat, wrestled the bat away from him and struck a single blow to the head 
which caused the claimant serious injuries. In upholding the defendant’s raising of self-defence the Court of 
Appeal took into account the anguish of the moment in assessing whether this was an excessive or 
disproportionate response to the threat posed and held that the law did not require the defendant to measure 
the violence to be deployed with mathematical precision.
Pause for reflection
Views will differ on what response is or is not reasonable in ‘self-defence’. Consider again the woman 
alone in a lift with an amorous male colleague. Suppose she takes matters into her own hands and 
knees the man in the groin—could he have a successful claim for battery against her? Or is her 
conduct excusable on the grounds of self-defence? Much will turn on whether her actions are 
considered a reasonable exercise of force. After all, to tell someone you like their dress is not to 
p. 428
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 28 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
threaten violence—in fact quite the opposite—nor are the words in themselves likely to be sufficient 
indication that they would be followed by any immediate unlawful force in, say, the form of a kiss or 
embrace—and, even if they were, surely the harm or injury of, for example, a stolen kiss isn’t 
comparable with that of a knee in the groin? Is it?
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-15-5>.
15.6  Intentional infliction of physical harm or emotional distress
So far this chapter has considered the three torts which comprise trespass to the person: battery, assault and 
false imprisonment. All these involve direct actual or potential physical infringements of the claimant’s 
person: touching them, putting them in fear of such touching or restricting their movement. However, it is 
possible to cause harm to another indirectly; that is, without physically interfering (or threatening to 
physically interfere) with them or their movements. In such cases, the trespass to the person torts offer no 
remedy. While the tort of negligence may offer some redress, where such harm is intentional a claimant may 
turn to the tort in Wilkinson v Downton and the Protection from Harassment Act 1997.
15.6.1  The tort in Wilkinson v Downton
Over the years, the status of the ‘well-known but seldom used principle in Wilkinson v Downton’ (Arden LJ, 
OPO v MLA [2014] at [30]), providing a remedy for intentionally causing physical or psychological harm, has 
been in some doubt—most notably following Lord Hoffmann’s suggestion in Wainwright that it should have 
‘no leading role in the modern law of tort’ and should instead be allowed to ‘disappear beneath the surface of 
the law of negligence’ (at [40]–[41]).37 However, since the decision in Rhodes v OPO, the tort in Wilkinson v 
Downton has had something of a revival.
In Wilkinson v Downton [1897] the defendant falsely told the claimant that her husband had been involved in 
an accident in which he had been seriously injured. The defendant later claimed that he had intended it as a 
practical joke. Unfortunately for him it was misjudged. The claimant took the news very badly, causing her to 
suffer severe physical and psychological reactions. Finding for the claimant, Wright J held that a cause of 
action arises when:
[t]he defendant … wilfully do an act calculated to cause physical harm to the … [claimant]—that is to 
say, infringe her right to personal safety, and thereby in fact caused physical harm to her. That 
proposition, without more appears to me to state a good cause of action, there being no justification 
alleged for the act. (at 57)38
p. 429
37
38
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 29 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
But what does it mean to say that the defendant’s act was ‘calculated to cause physical harm’?39 This was 
addressed by the House of Lords in Wainwright.
Wainwright v Home Office [2003] 2 AC 406 (HL)
The claimants, Mrs Wainwright and her son, Alan, were strip-searched by prison officers before 
visiting a family member in Leeds prison. The searches were a humiliating and distressing experience 
for both claimants. It was agreed that the search had been carried out ‘sloppily’ and not in accordance 
with the Prison Rules 1964. The claimants sought, in part, to rely on the tort in Wilkinson v Downton in 
order to ground a claim for the anxiety and distress they had suffered as a result of the prison officers’ 
actions.40
Unanimously rejecting their claims, the court held that liability under the Rules required, at the very 
least, the defendants to have acted without caring whether they caused harm (recklessly). This was 
not established on the facts of the case: the ‘deviations from the procedure laid down 
↵
for strip- 
searches were … not intended to increase the humiliation necessarily involved but merely 
sloppiness’ (Lord Hoffmann at [45]).
Lord Hoffmann continued that even if the necessary intention had been established in Wainwright not 
all intentionally caused distress should give rise to liability:
Even on the basis of a genuine intention to cause distress, I would wish … to reserve my 
opinion on whether compensation should be recoverable. In institutions and workplaces all 
over the country, people constantly do and say things with the intention of causing distress 
and humiliation to others. This shows lack of consideration and appalling manners but I am 
not sure that the right way to deal with it is always by litigation … The requirement of a 
course of conduct [in the Protection from Harassment Act 1997] shows that Parliament was 
conscious that it might not be in the public interest to allow the law to be set in motion for 
one boorish incident. It may be that any development of the common law should show 
similar caution. In my opinion, therefore, the claimants can build nothing on Wilkinson v 
Downton. It does not provide a remedy for distress which does not amount to recognised 
psychiatric injury and so far as there may be a tort of intention under which such damage is 
recoverable, the necessary intention was not established. (at [46]–[47])
Pause for reflection
Jonathan Morgan has argued that the decision in Wainwright reflects a judicial reluctance to recognise 
the significance of distress as an actionable harm:
39
40
p. 430
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 30 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
it is characterised respectively as a flowing from a failure of etiquette, or from the good 
natured fun of traditional rites of initiation … Such a dismissive attitude to mental distress is 
perhaps a little surprising, when the facts of Wainwright itself provide a glaring example of 
degrading behaviour, by a public authority at that. A rule that only ‘serious’ distress is 
actionable would better meet concerns of a flood of trivial claims, while allowing recovery in 
cases of truly humiliating conduct.41
What do you think? Think about the increasing prevalence of image-based sexual abuse, for example 
taking and/or publishing a private sexual image of someone without his or her consent. Should the 
fact that the victim’s distress does not develop into a psychiatric illness restrict their ability to claim? 
What if the victim’s primary emotion was anger rather than anxiety?42
↵
In any event, the view that Wainwright then prevents the application of the tort in Wilkinson v 
Downton in cases of intentionally caused anxiety or distress that falls short of a recognised psychiatric 
illness should now be read in light of Lord Neuberger’s comments in Rhodes v OPO (at [119]).
The Supreme Court in Rhodes v OPO [2015] confirmed that there are three elements to the tort in Wilkinson v 
Downton (at [73]):
a conduct element—requiring words or conduct directed towards the claimant for which there is no 
justification or reasonable excuse;
a mental element—requiring the intention to cause at least severe mental or emotional distress; and
a consequence element—requiring physical harm or a recognised psychiatric illness.
Rhodes v OPO (by his litigation friend BHM) and another [2015] UKSC 
32 (SC)
The case involved the publication of a memoir by James Rhodes, a well-known performing artist, in 
which he detailed the sexual abuse he suffered while at school and his subsequent mental health 
issues. The case was brought on behalf of his son, OPO, who suffers from a combination of attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder, Asperger’s, Dysgraphia and Dyspraxia, and sought to prevent 
publication on the basis that in revealing such details of his father, its publication would be likely to 
cause him severe emotional distress. The Court of Appeal held—somewhat surprisingly—that the 
claimant had an arguable case under the tort in Wilkinson v Downton and granted an interim 
injunction until the case went to trial.
41
42
p. 431
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 31 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The Supreme Court allowed the defendant’s appeal. Lady Hale and Lord Toulson gave the leading 
judgment. There are three elements in the Wilkinson v Downton tort: a conduct element, a mental 
element and a consequence element (at [73]). The first (conduct) requires that ‘words or conduct 
directed to the claimant for which there is no justification or reasonable excuse’ (at [74]). The burden 
of proof is on the claimant to demonstrate this and, in this case, the court held, this had not been met:
The book is for a wide audience and the question of justification has to be considered 
accordingly, not in relation to the claimant in isolation … [the Court of Appeal’s approach] 
excluded consideration of the wider question of justification based on the legitimate interest 
of the defendant telling his story to the world at large in the way he wishes to tell it, and the 
corresponding interest of the public in hearing his story. When those factors are taken into 
account … there is every justification for the publication. (Lady Hale and Lord Toulson at 
[75]–[76])
Lady Hale and Lord Toulson went on to consider the mental element of a claim: intention to cause at 
least severe mental or emotional distress. It is clear, therefore, that intention is not 
↵
limited to 
occasions where the defendant intended to cause illness, it being sufficient that they intended to 
cause severe distress which in fact results in recognisable illness (at [83]). But nor is recklessness 
enough.43 To illustrate this point, Lady Hale and Lord Toulson used these examples:
p. 432
43
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 32 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Suppose that a hostage taker demands money from the family of the hostage (H) for his safe 
release, or that a blackmailer threatens harm to a person unless the family of the victim (V) 
meets his demands. The wife or parent of H or V suffers severe distress causing them to 
develop a recognised psychiatric illness. We doubt that anyone would dispute that in those 
circumstances the hostage taker or blackmailer ought to be held liable for the consequences 
of his evil conduct. There would be no difficulty in inferring as a matter of fact that he 
intended to cause severe distress to the claimant; it was the means of trying to achieve his 
demand. But the wrongdoer may not have had the intention to cause psychiatric illness, and 
he may well have given no thought to its likelihood.
Compare that scenario with an example at the other end of the spectrum. The defendant has 
a dispute with his neighbour. Tempers become flared and he makes a deliberately insulting 
remark. He intends it to be upsetting, but he does not anticipate or intend that the neighbour 
will suffer severe emotional distress. Unfortunately the episode and in particular the insult 
have that effect, and the distress leads to a recognised form of psychiatric illness. It would be 
disproportionate to hold the defendant liable when he never intended to cause the neighbour 
to be seriously upset.
… To hold that the necessary mental element is intention to cause physical harm or severe 
mental or emotional distress strikes a just balance. It would lead to liability in the [first] 
example … but not in the [second] … It means that a person who actually intends to cause 
another to suffer severe mental or emotional distress (which should not be understated) 
bears the risk of legal liability if the deliberately inflicted severe distress causes the other to 
suffer a recognised psychiatric illness. (at [85]–[87])
In any evert, on the facts there was no suggestion that the appellant actually intended to cause 
psychiatric harm, severe mental or emotional distress to the claimant (at [89]). The third element 
(consequence) did not arise in this case. It was common ground that the necessary consequence for 
liability was physical harm or a recognised psychiatric illness. However, the court left open the 
question as to whether intentionally causing severe distress might be actionable. Lord Neuberger, in a 
short concurrence, suggested that it should be:
As I see it, therefore, there is plainly a powerful case for saying that, in relation to the instant 
tort, liability for distressing statements, where intent to cause distress is an essential 
ingredient, it should be enough for the claimant to establish that he suffered 
↵
significant distress as a result of the defendant’s statement. It is not entirely easy to see 
why, if an intention to cause the claimant significant distress is an ingredient of the tort and 
it enough to establish the tort in principle, the claimant should have to establish that he 
suffered something more serious than significant distress before he can recover 
compensation. (at [119])
p. 433
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 33 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
The Court of Appeal judgment in Rhodes v OPO (or MLA v OPO as the case was then known) was 
greeted with dismay and regret by many commentators.44 At the heart of many of the objections was 
the view that, were it to stand, the judgment had potentially significant ramifications for freedom of 
expression and was ‘likely to lead to a “chilling effect” on free speech’.45 Jo Glanville, the director of 
English PEN, a worldwide writers’ association (who were intervenors in the case at the Supreme 
Court), commented:
This sets a worrying precedent for injuncting memoirs or any non-fiction that may expose 
or investigate the past, whether personal or political. It would allow anyone to cite the 
distress of a relative or friend as grounds for censorship.46
The Supreme Court, in what has been described as a ‘paean to freedom of expression’,47 accepted 
these arguments:
A person who has suffered in the way that the appellant has suffered, and has struggled to 
cope with the consequences of his suffering in the way that he has struggle, has the right to 
tell the world about it … Freedom to report the truth is a basic right to which the law gives a 
very high level of protection. … It is difficult to envisage any circumstances in which speech 
which is not deceptive, threatening or possibly abusive, could give rise to liability in tort for 
wilful infringement of another’s right to personal safety. The right to report the truth is 
justification in itself. That is not to say that the right of disclosure is absolute, for a person 
may owe a duty to treat information as private or confidential. But there is no general law 
prohibiting the publication of facts which will cause distress to another, even if that is the 
person’s intention. (Lady Hale and Lord Toulson at [76]–[77])
One area where Rhodes may end up playing an important role is as an avenue of redress for victim/survivors 
of sexual abuse and violence. This possibility was considered in ABC v West Heath 2000 Ltd and Willock [2015]. 
The claimant, a pupil at the defendant’s school for children with emotional and behavioural difficulties, had 
been groomed over a number of years by 
↵
Mr Whillock, the school’s Vice Principal and co-author of the 
school’s Child Protection Policy. The grooming had involved encouraging the claimant to send indecent 
images of herself to him and the exchange of text messages of a sexual content.48 He had also sexually 
assaulted the claimant. The claimant sought damages both for the physical assault and under the tort in 
Wilkinson v Downton arguing that ‘the emotional manipulation of the claimant and the encouragement of her 
to take and send indecent photographs of herself and the ensuing sexual banter by text amounted to the 
intentional infliction of harm as redefined in the case of Rhodes’ (at [8]). The principal question at trial was 
whether the defendant had indeed physically assaulted the claimant. Having held that he had, Sir Robert 
44
45
46
,47
p. 434
48
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 34 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Nelson held that the claimant was entitled to damages for her psychiatric harm on this basis. However, he 
also concluded that the claimant could also succeed on the basis of the tort in Wilkinson v Downton, as clarified 
by Rhodes.
I should note, however, that I am entirely satisfied that a claim under Wilkinson v. Downton as 
explained in Rhodes is established. This tort of intentional infliction of harm in its reformulation has 
three elements (a) the conduct element (b) the mental element (c) the consequence element. 
(Rhodes para 73) I am satisfied that each is established. Mr Whillock acted unjustifiably towards the 
claimant by emotionally manipulating her and encouraging her to send indecent images of herself 
to him and engaging in sexual banter in the texts. His manipulation was successful in that she 
became infatuated with him and wanted to make him happy. She is still infatuated by him now. The 
mental element requires the claimant to establish that Mr Whillock intended to cause severe mental 
or emotional distress to her. There are however, as was said in Rhodes para 112 actions whose 
‘consequences or potential consequences are so obvious the perpetrator cannot realistically say that 
those consequences were unintended’. It was obvious that the illicit relationship would in the end 
cause nothing but harm to the vulnerable Claimant some 39 years younger than her groomer and 
those consequences must have been entirely clear and obvious to Mr Whillock. The consequence 
element is also established. As I have found under the heading of causation she suffered from an 
adjustment disorder after the disclosure in January 2010 with an acute exacerbation of her mental 
health problems when the abuse became public. (at [89])
The claimant was awarded £51,370 in damages, £25,000 of which related to the Rhodes claim.
Counterpoint
The Supreme Court in Rhodes held that liability under the rule in Wilkinson v Downton required the 
defendant to have intended to cause the relevant psychiatric harm to the claimant. Importantly, 
however, Lord Neuberger had said that intention might be established where the ‘consequences or 
potential consequences [of the statement or actions] are so obvious the perpetrator cannot 
realistically say that those consequences were unintended’ (at [112]). It was on this basis that Sir 
Robert Nelson in ABC concluded that the mental element for liability under Wilkinson v Downton was 
made out:
It was obvious that the illicit relationship would in the end cause nothing but harm to the 
vulnerable claimant some 39 years younger than her groomer and those consequences must 
have been entirely clear and obvious to Mr Whillock. (at [89])
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 35 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
↵
However, while, as in ABC, the court may find intention on the basis that psychiatric harm was 
an obvious consequence of the defendant’s actions, Lord Neuberger in Rhodes (at [113]) made clear 
that recklessness is not enough. The difficulty will come in distinguishing foresight of obvious harm 
from ‘mere’ recklessness.
Pause for reflection
How significant is the decision in ABC? The case, reported as the first in which damages were awarded 
in a civil court for ‘sexting’, was widely welcomed as ‘ground breaking’.49 Lawyers for the claimant, 
speaking to the press, suggested that it:
sets a precedent that where sexual abuse takes place, even when it doesn’t involve physical 
contact, if it involves exchanging sexually explicit images then the victim can recover 
compensation for that. The teacher involved got community service, which in terms of the 
criminal sanction means he got off very lightly given the impact on my client. So I hope 
these civil cases where there is a substantial award of damages will have an extra bite and 
deterrent for these people.50
We hope this is the case.51 However, it remains likely that the key challenge for those bringing such 
claims will be in establishing that their abusers did indeed intend the harm these claimants have 
suffered.
In our video ‘The torts that were ahead of their time’, we argue that the trespass torts and rule in 
Wilkinson v Downton were ahead of their time. Not only do they provide vital and effective alternative 
avenues for justice for victim-survivors of sexual assault and violence, but they play an important role 
in filling and exposing ongoing gaps in the criminal law.
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 15: The torts that were ahead of their time
p. 435
49
50
51
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 36 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
15.6.2  The Protection from Harassment Act 1997
The Protection from Harassment Act (PfHA) was a response to increasing public concern about harassment 
and, in particular, stalking.52 Its enactment attracted considerable media and celebrity attention. The Act has 
since been used by celebrities such as Cheryl Cole, Russell Brand and Harry Styles to try and prevent or 
restrict press intrusion. The Act introduces a civil remedy for harassment (s 3) as well as a criminal offence of 
harassment (s 2).53 In line with its principal purpose to prevent and protect rather than compensate, the Act 
↵
provides for the imposition of an injunction, alongside damages and criminal sanctions for non- 
compliance (s 3).54
The key provision states that ‘a person must not pursue a course of conduct (a) which amounts to 
harassment of another, and (b) which he knows, or ought to know, amounts to harassment of the other’ (s 
1(1)).55 Unlike the tort in Wilkinson v Downton, there is no requirement that the claimant suffer from a 
recognised psychiatric illness. Nor does the harassing conduct need to be directly aimed at the claimant. In 
Levi v Bates [2015], the Court of Appeal confirmed that an individual may be harassed by the defendant even if 
their actions are aimed at someone else:
The tort … of harassment does not require an intent to harass any one individual; section 1 of the Act 
is clear that the question whether conduct is harassing conduct is an objective question for the fact- 
finder. If therefore a defendant knows or ought to know that his conduct amounts to harassment, he 
should be liable to the person harassed, even if the conduct is aimed at another person … It may not 
be often that a person who is not the target of the harassing conduct will, in fact, be harassed. But a 
wife, or other close family member, may well suffer a feeling of harassment if a defendant publishes 
her and her husband’s address with a view to encouraging members of the public to visit that 
address in an aggressive or hostile manner. (Longmore LJ at [55]–[56])
15.6.2.1  A ‘course of conduct’
The 1997 Act defines a ‘course of conduct’ as harassing conduct on ‘at least two occasions’(s 7(3)).56 The 
incidents must be similar in type and in context: ‘the fewer incidents there are and the further in time they 
are apart, the less likely it will be that they can properly be treated as constituting a course of conduct’ (Elias 
LJ, James v DPP [2009] at [11]). Whether the defendant’s actions amount to a ‘course of conduct’ will then 
depend on the facts of the case. It is not necessary that the two or more occasions amount individually to 
harassment. As Rix LJ noted in Iqbal v Dean Manson Solicitors [2011]:
Take the typical case of stalking, or of malicious phone calls. When a defendant, D, walks past a 
claimant C’s door, or calls C’s telephone but puts the phone down without speaking, the single act by 
itself is neutral, or may be. But if that act is repeated on a number of occasions, the course of conduct 
may well amount to harassment. That conclusion can only be arrived at by looking at the individual 
acts complained of as a whole … So it is with a course of communications such 
↵
as letters. A first 
letter, by itself, may appear innocent and may even cause no alarm, or at most a slight unease. 
However, in the light of subsequent letters, that first letter may be seen as part of a campaign of 
harassment. (at [45])
52
53
p. 436
54
55
56
p. 437
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 37 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Perhaps surprisingly, a single publication of a harassing statement or image online can amount to a ‘course of 
conduct’ where the defendant does so ‘in the knowledge that such publications will inevitably come to [the 
claimant’s] attention on more than one occasion and on each occasion cause them alarm and distress 
constitutes harassment under the PHA’ (Tugendhat J, Law Society v Kordowski [2011] at [61]). Tugendhat J 
continued:
The publication is an ongoing one on a prominent website; accordingly the distress and alarm 
caused by the publication will also be continuous. It is reasonable to infer in every case that those 
posted would suffer such distress and alarm on at least two occasions. (at [64])
Pause for reflection
While Tugendhat J’s understanding of a ‘course of conduct’ may allow victim/survivors of image- 
based sexual abuse to utilise the provisions of the 1997 Act in circumstances where a single act (e.g. 
uploading a single picture) has been done in the knowledge that it would be viewed by a large number 
of people,57 what about alleged perpetrators of sexual violence and/or harassment, does this also 
provide them with a remedy?
The simple answer is yes. The PfHA, as well as other actions such as defamation,58 apply to victims 
and perpetrators of (on- and offline) abuse alike. As Brett Wilson, a media law specialist, explains 
there are a number of reasons why someone who has been named in a tweet as an abuser might bring 
a claim for harassment:
Truth is not a defence to a harassment claim.59 The issue is whether the conduct is 
reasonable or not.60 Standing outside someone’s house with a megaphone every day of the 
week shouting ‘John Smith sexually harasses women’ is likely to be deemed unreasonable 
even if it is true that John Smith has sexually harassed women in the past. Whilst it would 
depend on the facts of the case, the same logic could be applied to an online campaign 
where these allegations are repeatedly tweeted or posted.
It is not necessary to prove serious harm or any harm to reputation.61 Whilst there is often 
an overlap with defamation, the tort is not concerned with injury to reputation. Damages 
are awarded for distress and injury to feelings.62 An injunction can be imposed to prohibit 
repetition of the conduct.
↵
 It is not even necessary to show that anyone read the statements.63 The question is 
whether the conduct was harassing and whether the defendant knew or should have 
known this. Harassment may be established by unwanted communications to the 
claimant alone.
The legal process is often more straightforward, quicker and cheaper (in relative terms) 
[than, for example, bringing a claim in defamation or privacy].64
57
58
59
60
61
62
p. 438
63
64
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 38 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
15.6.2.2  ‘Knows, or ought to know amounts to harassment’
The defendant need not have foreseen that their conduct would harass or cause the claimant anxiety. Liability 
is based on actual or constructive knowledge that their conduct amounts to harassment, that is whether the 
defendant ought to have known that their conduct amounts to harassment. The test is whether ‘a reasonable 
person in the possession of the same information would think the course of conduct amounted to 
harassment of the other’ (s 1(2)).
The PfHA leaves the definition of harassment deliberately wide. It simply states that harassment includes 
‘alarming the person or causing the person distress’ (though conduct can still amount to harassment even 
where no distress or alarm is caused) (s 7(2)). What is clear is that annoying or aggravating matters of 
everyday life will not amount to harassment: ‘the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 is not designed to 
interfere with the ordinary give and take of everyday life’ (Mitton v Benefield [2011] at [10]). The behaviour 
must be of a level that is ‘oppressive and unacceptable’:
Courts are well able to recognise the boundary between conduct which is unattractive, even 
unreasonable, and conduct which is oppressive and unacceptable. To cross the boundary from the 
regrettable to the unacceptable the gravity of the misconduct must be of an order which would 
sustain criminal liability under section 2. (Lord Nicholls, Majrowski [2007] at [30])
Over the years the PfHA has been used in response to the publication of victimising newspaper articles 
(Thomas v News Group Newspapers Ltd; Trimingham v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2012]), sending mass letters 
or emails and setting up websites (Merlin Entertainments LPC, Chessington World of Adventures Operations v 
Cave [2014]; Ashford Borough Council v Wilson [2021]), a Facebook page revealing the identity and 
whereabouts of a convicted sex offender (CG v Facebook Ireland Ltd and Joseph McCloskey [2015]),65 multiple, 
unjustified bills and threats of legal action (Ferguson v British Gas [2009]), posting of personal information or 
purported information online (GYH v Persons Unknown [2017]), paparazzi photographers,66 homophobic 
bullying in the workplace (Majrowski; Veakins v Kier Islington Ltd [2009]) and intimidating public 
demonstrations (Daiichi UK Ltd v Stop Huntington Animal Cruelty [2004]).
15.6.2.3  Excluded activities
The PfHA excludes certain conduct from the remit of harassment. These are listed in section 1(3) and include 
activity for the purpose of detecting or preventing crime (s 1(3)(a)), that is pursued under any enactment or 
rule of law (s 1(3)(b)) and that which is ‘in the particular circumstances … reasonable’ (s 1(3)(c)).
In Hayes v Willoughby [2013], the defendant, Willoughby, had embarked on a campaign against his former 
employer alleging fraud, embezzlement and tax evasion in relation to his management of his companies. A 
subsequent investigation found no basis in the allegations, however the defendant continued with his 
campaign. The majority of the Supreme Court held that the defendant had no section 1(3)(a) defence to his 
harassing behaviour. The test was neither wholly objective (as that would render the reasonableness defence 
65
66
p. 439
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 39 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
in section 1(3)(c) otiose), nor subjective (a mere belief that he is preventing a crime, however absurd, cannot 
justify the defendant persisting in a course of conduct which the law recognises as harassment). Rather the 
defendant’s actions must pass an ‘undemanding’ ‘test of rationality’:
He must have thought rationally about the material suggesting the possibility of criminality and 
formed the view that the conduct said to constitute harassment was appropriate for the purpose of 
preventing or detecting it. If he has done these things, then he has the relevant purpose. The court 
will not test his conclusions by reference to the view which a hypothetical reasonable man in his 
position would have formed. (Lord Sumption at [15])
In contrast Willoughby was described by Lord Sumption as having a ‘vendetta’ against Hayes which ‘was more 
than objectively unreasonable. It was irrational. His persistence was obsessive’ (at [16]).67
But what amounts to reasonable conduct? In Sube v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2020] Mr and Mrs Sube, a 
married couple with nine children, were the subject of a series of newspaper articles in the local and national 
press detailing their dissatisfaction with their social housing offered by Luton Borough Council and published 
under headlines including: ‘Jobless dad whines about £15k-a-year council home—and turns down five 
bedroom house’. The comments on the online versions were largely critical of the couple and included racial 
abuse. They brought a rare claim for harassment against the publisher of the papers.68 Rejecting their claim, 
Warby J held that:
67
68
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 40 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(2)
(5)
(6)
The Court must test the ‘necessity’ of any interference with freedom of expression
by using the well-known three-part test:
The test of ‘necessity in a democratic society’ requires the Court to determine 
whether the ‘interference’ corresponded to a ‘pressing social need’, whether it was 
proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued and whether the reasons given … to 
justify it are relevant and sufficient. Nilsen and Johnsen v Norway (1999) 30 EHRR 878 
[43].
…
nothing short of conscious or negligent abuse of media freedom will justify a finding of 
harassment:
… the test [of reasonableness] requires the publisher to consider whether a proposed 
series of articles, which is likely to cause distress to an individual, will constitute an 
abuse 
↵
of the freedom of press which the pressing social needs of a democratic 
society require should be curbed. Thomas v News Group [50] (Lord Phillips MR).
It will be a rare or exceptional case in which these criteria are satisfied, in relation to media 
publication. …
In general, press criticism, even if robust, does not constitute unreasonable conduct 
and does not fall within the natural meaning of harassment. … Thomas v News Group 
(Lord Phillips MR). (at [68])
Pause for reflection
Joanne Conaghan argues that a key difficulty with the PfHA is that it ‘assumes a degree of consensus 
[as to what constitutes harassing behaviour] which may not exist’.69 Despite the view of the Court of 
Appeal in Thomas v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2001] that ‘harassment is … a word which has a 
meaning that is generally understood’ (at [30]), this may not always be the case. Opinions may differ 
on when, for example, an ex-lover’s attempts to win a partner back become threatening or a series of 
newspaper articles amount to harassment.
Moreover, she continues, the ‘adoption of the “reasonable harasser’s” perspective’ fails to directly 
engage with the effect of the harasser’s conduct on the claimant and ‘inevitably incorporates a gender 
dimension into the standard applied, certainly where the conduct in question has a sexual 
dimension’.70 Do you agree? Think again about the infatuated student in the examples at the start of 
the chapter—at what point do you think their phone calls will constitute harassment?
p. 440
69
70
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 41 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-15-6>.
15.7  Conclusion
This chapter explores the torts which comprise trespass to the person—battery, assault and false 
imprisonment. These torts protect an individual against an infringement of their personal integrity through 
the infliction of unlawful force (battery), the fear of the infliction of said force (assault) and the unlawful 
restriction of their freedom of movement (false imprisonment). The three torts have the same 
characteristics: they must be committed intentionally; they must cause direct and immediate harm; and they 
are actionable without proof of loss. These characteristics distinguish the trespass to the person torts from 
the tort of negligence: while trespass compensates the claimant in relation to direct and intentional harm 
(e.g. being deliberately hit), negligence compensates the claimant for unintentional or indirect harm (i.e. 
accidental injury).
Decision Trees 15.1, 15.2 and 15.3 show the elements of a claim in each of the three trespass to the person 
torts.
Explore the elements of each tort using the interactive versions of Decision Tree 15.1 <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-15-interactive- 
decision-tree-15-1>, Decision Tree 15.2 <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-  
resources/horsey9e-chapter-15-interactive-decision-tree-15-2> and Decision Tree 15.3 <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-15-interactive- 
decision-tree-15-3>.
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 42 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Decision Tree 15.1 Battery: the infliction of unlawful force on another
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 43 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Decision Tree 15.2 Assault: an act which causes another person to apprehend the infliction of immediate, unlawful force on their 
person
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 44 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Decision Tree 15.3 False imprisonment: the unlawful and total restriction of another’s freedom of movement
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 45 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
2
→
→
→
→
→
The chapter also considered the tort in Wilkinson v Downton, which provides a remedy for intentional acts 
causing indirect physical and psychiatric harm, and the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 which imposes 
civil and criminal liability for harassment, where there has been an ‘oppressive and unacceptable’ course of 
conduct.
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
Outline the trespass to the person torts; how do they differ from the tort of negligence?
‘Tort law has, in recent years, come a long way toward removing the barriers which previously stood in the 
way of complainants seeking redress in the context of harassing conduct.’ Assess the accuracy of this 
statement.
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-15-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Answering the problem question
Consider again the problem question at the start of this chapter. Now having read about the topic, what 
would be your advice to the various parties?
Here are some pointers to get you started:
There are a few potential assaults here: Thomas’s threat to Henry, whispered advances to Maeve and (if he 
saw it coming) Henry’s tripping up of Thomas.
Could Thomas’s missed calls to Maeve be considered harassing behaviour under the Protection from 
Harassment Act?
Don’t forget defences—is Maeve’s battery of Thomas in self-defence?
If you need some more guidance:
See the annotated version of the problem with issues and cases to consider <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-15-annotated- 
problem-question-interactive>.
p. 441
p. 442
p. 443
p. 444
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 46 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Check your answer against the suggested outline answer <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-15-answers-to-problem-question>.
Further reading
Though some of the academic writing in this area predates the decision in Wainwright and Rhodes v OPO, it continues 
to offer an insightful and relevant critique of the law in this area.
Antonsdóttir, Hildur Fjóla ‘Compensation as a Means to Justice? Sexual Violence Survivors’ Views on the Tort Law 
Option in Iceland’ (2020) 28 Feminist Legal Studies 277
Chamallas, Martha ‘Will Tort Law Have its #MeToo Moment?’ 4 September 2018, Ohio State Public Law Working Paper 
No 456
Conaghan, Joanne ‘Enhancing Civil Remedies for (Sexual) Harassment: s 3 of the Protection from Harassment Act 
1997’ (1999) 7 Feminist Legal Studies 203
Godden, Nikki ‘Tort Claims for Rape: More Trials, Fewer Tribulations?’ in Janice Richardson and Erika Rackley (eds) 
Feminist Perspectives on Tort Law (Routledge 2012) 163–78
Horsey, Kirsty and Erika Rackley ‘Tort Law’ in Rosemary Auchmuty (ed) Great Debates on Law and Gender (Palgrave 
2018) ch 2
Hunt, Chris DL ‘Wilkinson v Downton Revisited’ [2015] Cambridge Law Journal 392
↵
Liew, Ying Khai ‘The Rule in Wilkinson v Downton: Conduct, Intention and Justifiability’ (2015) 78 Modern Law Review 
349
Lunney, Mark ‘False Imprisonment, Fare Dodging and Federation—Mr Robertson’s Evening Out’ (2009) 31 Sydney Law 
Review 537
Morgan, Jonathan Great Debates in Tort Law (Hart 2022) ch 2
O’Connell, Aislinn ‘Image-Based Sexual Abuse and Gender Conceptions of Harm in Tort’ in Kirsty Horsey (ed) Diverse 
Voices in Tort Law (Bristol University Press 2024) 221–44
Patten, Keith ‘Defining Harassment’ (2010) 160 New Law Journal 331
Trindale, FA ‘Intentional Torts: Some Thoughts on Assault and Battery’ (1982) 2 Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 211
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-15-web-links?options=showName>.
p. 445
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 47 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Notes
 
1. See further Matthew Dyson ‘The Timing of Tortious and Criminal Actions for the Same Wrong’ [2012] Cambridge Law 
Journal 86.
 
2. On this case and point, see further Nicholas McBride ‘Trespass to the Person: The Effect of Mistakes and Alternative 
Remedies on Liability’ [2008] Cambridge Law Journal 416.
 
3. See further Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley ‘Tort Law’ in Rosemary Auchmuty (ed) Great Debates on Law and Gender 
(Palgrave 2018) 14–19; Nikki Godden ‘Tort Claims for Rape: More Trials, Fewer Tribulations?’ in Janice Richardson and 
Erika Rackley (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Tort Law (Routledge 2012) 163–78; Hildur Fjóla Antonsdóttir 
‘Compensation as a Means to Justice? Sexual Violence Survivors’ Views on the Tort Law Option in Iceland’ (2020) 28 
Feminist Legal Studies 277 and, for a more recent example of this in practice, Tim Dale and Emma Glasbey, 
‘Rotherham grooming survivor awarded £425k after suing rapist’ BBC News, 27 March 2023.
 
4. It may be that the reference to ‘harm’ here is misleading. The effect of the torts of trespass to the person being 
actionable per se is that the claimant need not show that they have suffered any loss for their claim to succeed. As 
such, the claimant need not have suffered any tangible (physical or psychiatric) harm. Rather, they simply need to 
show that they have been unlawfully touched (battery), apprehended an immediate unlawful touching (assault) or 
been physically restrained (false imprisonment).
 
5. The Act stated that personal injury actions for ‘negligence, nuisance or breach of duty’ must be brought within three 
years, while other tort actions were barred after six years.
 
6. It may be that disagreements as to whether a trespass can be committed negligently are somewhat academic. After 
all, if a claimant is unable to sue for negligently touching in trespass, so long as they have suffered some form of 
physical injury, a remedy will lie in the tort of negligence. And if they have not suffered such harm, then a claim in 
trespass would be largely useless since no more than nominal damages would be awarded.
 
7. WE Peel and James Goudkamp Winfield and Jolowicz on Tort (19th edn Sweet & Maxwell 2014) 60.
 
8. Joanne Conaghan and Wade Mansell The Wrongs of Tort (2nd edn Pluto Press 1999) 164–5.
 
9. ibid 166.
 
10. The defendant was convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. The case has since been held to have been 
wrongly decided on another ground.
 
11. Alastair Mullis and Ken Oliphant Torts (Palgrave Macmillan 2012) 219.
 
12. For more on the miner’s strike, which forms the backdrop to Thomas v National Union of Miners, see the BBC News 
‘on this day’ resource for 12 March 1984 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/march/12/  
newsid_2540000/2540175.stm>.
 
13. Conaghan and Mansell n8 170.
 
14. ibid.
 
15. Ireland predates the widespread use of mobile phones and so the calls were made to the claimants’ ‘landline’ 
phones.
 
16. See section 15.5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 48 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
17. This is different still to the situation where the defendant entirely innocently locks the claimant in a room (for which 
there will likely be no liability) and to where a defendant ought to have known that there was someone in the room (in 
which case there will be a claim in negligence). The law distinguishes between the situation where you lock the door 
knowing that someone is inside (false imprisonment), where you lock the door knowing that someone might be inside 
(which we tend to call (subjective) recklessness—but which will, it seems, still meet the intention requirements of false 
imprisonment)—and the situation where you lock the door not thinking that someone might be inside but when you 
ought to have known this (negligence).
 
18. Sadly, Mrs Esegbona died a week later after she (again) attempted to self-extubate herself. The NHS Trust was 
found negligent in failing to give the nursing home sufficient advice in relation to her treatment.
 
19. Despite ultimately winning his case, the claimant had to pay all his costs for the original trial (at which his claim was 
unsuccessful), and recovered just 25 per cent of his costs for the appeal.
 
20. See further Mark Lunney’s interesting discussion of the historical and commercial context of this controversial case, 
including an explanation for the misprinting of the claimant’s name—as Robinson rather than Robertson—in the 
authorised report of the Privy Council: ‘False Imprisonment, Fare Dodging and Federation—Mr Robertson’s Evening 
Out’ (2009) 31 Sydney Law Review 537.
 
21. Paula Giliker and Silas Beckwith Tort (Sweet & Maxwell 2008) 353.
 
22. R v Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison, ex p Hague established that a prisoner ‘cannot maintain an action for false 
imprisonment against the [prison] governor even if he is deprived of any limited degree of freedom which he usually 
enjoys under the prison regime. His detention anywhere within the prison is lawful’ (Iqbal at [62]).
 
23. Thus if the father and daughter, in the example at the start of this chapter, were found by the security guard before 
they realised they were imprisoned, their damages for false imprisonment (assuming the other elements of the tort 
can be established) would be reduced accordingly.
 
24. The claim for false imprisonment was rejected by the Court of Appeal and was not considered by the House of 
Lords. The claimant accepted that if the House of Lords found that there was no infringement of her rights under Art 5 
then her claim for false imprisonment must also fail, as her containment within the cordon would be justified by the 
lawful exercise of police powers (at [11]).
 
25. It may also be that there are other avenues to compensation in such a case: e.g. an action for breach of statutory 
duty, negligence, misfeasance in public office (Karagozlu v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2006]) or using 
the HRA.
 
26. Lumba was followed just two months later by Kambadzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] on a 
similar issue. The appellant was a foreign national who had been detained pending the making of a deportation order. 
However, the Secretary of State had not complied with a policy on the frequency of review of the detention. A majority 
of the Supreme Court held that the appellant’s detention was unlawful (and that the appellant had been falsely 
imprisoned) during the periods where there had been no review. Though the full facts of the case had yet to be argued, 
if it was found that the appellant would have been detained even if his case had been reviewed, the court held that it is 
likely that only nominal damages would be awarded. Lord Brown (with whom Lord Rodger agreed) dissented on the 
basis that Lumba did not compel the majority’s decision as it concerned a substantive entitlement under a policy, not 
a procedural one, and because it held that not every breach of public law will result in the detention being unlawful.
 
27. In section 15.4.3.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 49 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
28. There has been some uncertainty as to whether the defence of contributory negligence applies in cases involving 
intentional harm (see e.g. Murphy v Culhane [1977]; Reeves v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2000]). 
However, in Standard Chartered Bank v Pakistan National Shipping Corp (No 2) [2002] Lord Rodger suggested that 
contributory negligence was not applicable in cases of intentional wrongdoing (at [43]–[45]) and more recently in Co- 
operative Group (CWS) v Pritchard [2011] Atkins LJ held that the defence of contributory negligence does not apply to 
the torts of assault and battery (at [62]).
 
29. See e.g. R v Lincoln [1990] concerning ‘rough and tumble’ on the football pitch. There is no battery when the 
claimant has voluntarily taken the risk of touching. Consent will not be valid when it is to actions which are deemed 
contrary to public policy (see AG’s Reference (No 6 of 1980) [1981] and R v Brown [1994]).
 
30. This is because though consent is treated as a ‘defence’ to the trespass torts considered in this chapter, it is in fact 
central to the operation of the trespass torts and as such it is not a ‘true’ defence (Freeman v Home Office (No 2) 
[1984]).
 
31. This does not mean that the patient has no claim where they have been given inadequate information, e.g. not 
being fully informed of the risks of the medical procedure. However, it may be that the claim is more appropriately 
brought in negligence. The UK Supreme Court has recently confirmed the practice of a patient-friendly, ‘informed 
consent’, approach to a doctor’s failure to warn of risks adopted by the General Medical Council (GMC)—see 
Montgomery v Lanarkshire NHS Trust [2015] discussed in section 8.3.2.1.
 
32. In Re MM (An Adult) [2007], Munby J held that there is ‘no relevant distinction between the test in s 3(1) of the Act 
and the pre-existing common law’ (at [74]).
 
33. Shaun Pattinson Medical Law and Ethics (6th edn Sweet & Maxwell 2020) ch 5.
 
34. Celia Wells ‘On the Outside Looking In: Perspectives on Enforced Caesareans’ in Sally Sheldon and Michael 
Thomson (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Health Care Law (Cavendish 1998) 237. See also Emma Cave, ‘Protecting 
Patients from their Bad Decisions: Rebalancing Rights, Relationships, and Risk’ (2017) 25 Medical Law Review 527.
 
35. For an application of the principles in Re MB (and the first published judgment approving a caesarean section since 
the enactment of the Mental Capacity Act 2005), see Re AA [2012].
 
36. Necessity is most often used where the claimant is temporarily unable to consent. However, it has also been 
applied in other situations (see e.g. the extended discussion in Re A (Conjoined Twins) [2001] and, in relation to false 
imprisonment, see Bournewood; Austin and other v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2007] (CA)—note that the 
House of Lords did not discuss the application of necessity).
 
37. This may be sensible in relation to negligently inflicted psychiatric injury—not least because (in Lord Hoffmann’s 
view) the tort in Wilkinson v Downton was only established in order to circumvent a now defunct decision (Victorian 
Railways Commissioners v Coultas [1888]) which prevented recovery in negligence for such injuries. Though see Lady 
Hale and Lord Toulson’s rejection of this as an ‘interesting reconstruction [that] shows the pitfalls of interpreting a 
decision more than a century earlier without a full understanding of jurisprudence and common legal terminology of 
the earlier period’ (Rhodes at [61]–[63]).
 
38. Wilkinson v Downton was approved by the Court of Appeal in Janvier v Sweeney [1919].
 
39. See further Denise Réaume ‘The Role of Intention in the Tort in Wilkinson v Downton’ in Jason Neyers, Erika 
Chamberlain and Stephen Pitel (eds) Emerging Issues in Tort Law (Hart 2007) 533.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 50 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
40. A battery claim in relation to the touching of Alan’s penis was allowed by the Court of Appeal (and was not appealed 
by the Home Office). The claimants also argued there was a breach of their Art 8 rights (right to private and family life). 
This was rejected by the House of Lords, but upheld in the ECtHR which unanimously held that there had been a 
breach of both their Art 8 and 13 rights (Wainwright v UK [2006]). The privacy aspects of the case are discussed in 
section 16.5.
 
41. Jonathan Morgan ‘Privacy Torts: Out with the Old, Out with the New’ (2004) 120 Law Quarterly Review 393, 395.
 
42. On the role of the civil law in addressing the harms of image-based sexual abuse, see further Clare McGlynn and 
Erika Rackley ‘Image-based Sexual Abuse’ (2017) 37 Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 534; Horsey and Rackley n3 and 
see FGX v Gaunt [2023].
 
43. As Lady Hale and Lord Toulson note:
Recklessness is a word capable of different shades of meaning. In everyday usage it may include 
thoughtlessness about the likely consequences in circumstances where there is an obvious high risk, or in 
other words gross negligence’ going on to refer to the Law Commission’s wording whereby:
A person acts recklessly with respect to a result if he is aware of a risk that it will occur and it is 
unreasonable to take that risk having regard to the circumstances as he knows or believes them to 
be. (Consultation paper on Reform of Offences against the Person (LCCP 217, 2015)). (at [84])
 
44. Ying Khai ‘The Rule in Wilkinson v Downton: Conduct, Intention and Justifiability’ (2015) 78 Modern Law Review 349; 
Dan Tench ‘Case Law: OPO v MLA, Shock and Disbelief at the Court of Appeal’ Inforrm’s blog 13 October 2014.
 
45. MLA ‘Notice of appeal in the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom’ 6 November 2014.
 
46. Ian Cobain and Matthew Taylor ‘Ex-wife of well-known performer obtains injunction against book to protect son’ 
The Guardian 11 October 2014.
 
47. Dan Tench ‘Case Law: OPO v James Rhodes (formerly MLA): Pianist’s book unbanned, no intention to cause distress’ 
Inforrm’s blog 20 May 2015.
 
48. The defendant pleaded guilty to four counts of possession of indecent photographs of a child (the claimant).
 
49. Noel Titheradge ‘Damages awarded in “sexting” case for the first time’ BBC News, 30 November 2015.
 
50. David McClenaghan in Matthew Weaver ‘Woman awarded £25,000 sexting damages in legal first’ The Guardian 30 
November 2015.
 
51. ABC was followed in MXX v A Secondary School [2022] [150]–[163] though the claimant was ultimately unsuccessful 
in holding the school vicariously liable for her abuser’s actions. See section 20.2.
 
52. This aspect of the Act has been strengthened through the creation of two new offences of stalking inserted into the 
PfHA as ss 2A and 4A by virtue of the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 (though see James Gregory ‘Stalking super- 
complaint launched against police’ BBC News, 25 November 2022). Though the Act does not include a formal 
definition of stalking, s 2A(3) gives examples of behaviours typically associated with it, including following or spying on 
a person, monitoring their use of the internet or email, loitering and interfering with their property. The introduction 
of ‘Stalking Protection Orders’ introduced in the Stalking Protection Act 2019, allows courts to ban perpetrators from 
going to certain locations and from contacting victims and requires them to seek help.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 51 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
53. The focus here is on civil claims. On the relationship between the criminal and civil aspects of the 1997 Act see Emily 
Finch ‘Stalking the Perfect Stalking Law: An Evaluation of the Efficacy of the Protection from Harassment Act 
1997’ [2002] Criminal Law Review 703.
 
54. See e.g. AM v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2012] in which interim injunctions were granted against journalists and 
photographers to prevent them from waiting outside—so-called ‘doorstepping’—the homes of people they wished to 
photograph or interview. On the impact of the Act on the activities of the media, see Nicole Moreham ‘Harassment by 
Publication in the Media’ Inforrm’s blog 26 January 2016.
 
55. Section 1A (added by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005) extends the remit of the 1997 Act to include a 
course of conduct directed at two or more people which the harasser knows or ought to know amounts to harassment 
and by which he intends to persuade any person (whether or not one of those mentioned (in s 1A(a))) (i) not to do 
something that he is entitled or required to do, or (ii) to do something that he is not under any obligation to do (s 
1A(c)). In such circumstances, a course of conduct is defined as ‘conduct on at least one occasion in relation to each of 
those persons’ (s 7(3)(b)).
 
56. The Act does not, therefore, cover one-off incidents, such as the practical joke in Wilkinson v Downton, however 
serious. Though a victim who fears that a single incident of harassing conduct might in the future become a course of 
conduct may be able to claim under s 3(1) which provides a remedy for the ‘apprehension’ of a breach of s 1. See 
further, David Ormerod, Case Comment: ‘Harassment: Whether Two Incidents of Harassment Constitute a Course of 
Conduct’ [2000] Criminal Law Review 580 discussing Lau v DPP [2000].
 
57. See e.g. ABK v KDT & FGH [2013]; AXB v BXA [2018] and generally Horsey and Rackley n3.
 
58. See section 17.3.
 
59. Unlike in defamation, see section 17.6.1. See Merlin Entertainments LPC, Chessington World of Adventures 
Operations v Cave [2014].
 
60. It may be that in cases of public figures, a general public interest in exposing the wrongdoer would be sufficient to 
make the conduct reasonable—see discussion of s 1(3)(c) of the 1997 Act later.
 
61. As required in defamation, see section 17.3.
 
62. The amount of damages awarded in injury to feelings cases typically range from £800 to £42,000, with only the most 
‘exceptional cases’ exceeding £42,000 (Presidential Guidance ‘Employment Tribunal awards for injury to feelings and 
psychiatric injury following De Souza v Vinco Construction (UK) Ltd [2017] EWCA Civ 879’).
 
63. Again, unlike in defamation, see section 17.5.
 
64. Brett Wilson ‘#MeToo, naming and shaming: a risky business’ Inforrm’s blog 2 November 2017.
 
65. See also Iain Wilson ‘Case Law: Suttle v Walker, Facebook “Keyboard warrior” order to pay £55,000 libel and 
harassment damages’ Inforrm’s blog 30 January 2019.
 
66. ‘News: Harry Styles harassment case, photographers consent to permanent injunctions’ Inforrm’s blog 11 March 
2014; Natalie Peck ‘Harassment and injunctions: Cheryl Cole’ Inforrm’s blog 7 July 2011.
 
67. See section 17.3.
 
68. See further Tim James-Matthews ‘Case Law: Sube v News Group Newspapers, Harassment claims against media 
publishers dismissed’ Inforrm’s blog 27 May 2020.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
15. Intentional interferences with the person
Page 52 of 52
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
69. Joanne Conaghan ‘Enhancing Civil Remedies for (Sexual) Harassment: s 3 of the Protection from Harassment Act 
1997’ (1999) 7 Feminist Legal Studies 203, 207–8.
 
70. ibid.
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
69.
70.
