4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 1 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0004
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter examines the two separate but closely linked concepts of liability for omissions and for the actions of third 
parties. The first section considers when and why the courts have established that a duty of care should be owed by 
defendants when the harm was the result of their omission, and the second explores the situations when a defendant may owe 
a duty in relation to the action(s) of a third party. Ordinarily you can be liable only for things that you do, but when someone 
does not do something that they ought to have done a duty might be found. Similarly, while it appears odd that someone may 
be liable for harms that someone else caused, the courts have nonetheless found that in limited circumstances people who 
have responsibility for, or control over, others may incur a duty in respect of the harms caused by these third parties.
Keywords: 
tort law, duty of care, liability for omissions, third party, assumption of responsibility, reliance
Problem question
Read this problem question carefully and keep it in mind while you are working through the 
chapter that follows. At the end of the chapter you will be able to apply what you have learnt to the 
problem question and advise the relevant parties.
Margaret, who is 75, is in the supermarket on a busy Saturday afternoon when she feels pains in her 
chest. It transpires she is having a heart attack and she collapses to the floor. Although the 
supermarket is crowded, no one comes to help her.
p. 76
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 2 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
→
→
→
Amir, the store manager, puts a call out over the PA system asking if there is a doctor present, but 
otherwise offers no assistance. Hearing the announcement, Kasim, a nurse, comes forward and tries 
to help Margaret, but he fails to put her in the recovery position. Margaret later dies.
Meanwhile, some youths see Margaret’s car, which was left unlocked and with the key still in the 
ignition in the supermarket car park as she did not want to spend time looking for a parking space. 
The youths drive off in the car, failing to stop at a pedestrian crossing, hitting Jill and her daughter 
Heather who were crossing the road. Both are injured, Heather seriously. One of the youths, Levi, who 
was not wearing a seat belt, suffers a serious head injury.
Advise the parties.
4.1  Introduction
Consider the following situations:
A small child falls into a pond and is struggling to get out. A passing adult offers no assistance.
A couple hire a motorboat at the seaside and are clearly in difficulties when the boat begins to sink. The 
hire shop owner sits on the beach and does nothing to help them.
A doctor is driving along a road on which there has been a bad accident, but does not stop to help the 
victims.
A man sees another man about to walk off the edge of a cliff, but does nothing to try and stop him.
The door to a pub is left open one night by the cleaner. Some teenagers enter, consume a large amount 
of alcohol and cause lots of damage.
The same teenagers, upon leaving the pub, vandalise a car belonging to a neighbour of the pub.
In each scenario above the harm suffered by the various individuals is attributable to a ‘third party’ or 
occurred because the potential defendant did not do anything (as opposed to doing something that causes 
harm). It might seem logical that the defendant should incur no liability in any of these situations. As in all 
negligence claims liability here depends, first, on whether a duty of care was owed to the person injured. For 
example, we ask ‘Does an adult walking past a drowning child owe that child a duty of care?’ Whether a duty 
is owed by one party to another to whom they cause harm often depends on the manner in which that harm 
was inflicted. Generally, there is little problem establishing a duty to avoid the direct infliction of physical 
harm. However, when harm is inflicted indirectly, such as through a failure to act (what the law calls an 
omission, or nonfeasance), or where the immediate cause of the harm was the act of a third party (someone 
other than the claimant or defendant), it becomes more difficult to establish that a duty would—or should— 
be owed.
p. 77
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 3 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
This chapter considers two problematic duty areas. The first section considers when and why the courts have 
established that a duty of care should be owed by defendants when the harm was the result of their omission, 
while the second explores the situations when a defendant may owe a duty in relation to the act(s) of a third 
party. It might be thought strange that someone would ever compensate someone else for a harm that was 
not the result of their own actions. This is the stance the courts have generally taken: ordinarily you can be 
liable only for things that you do, not things you do not do. However, when someone does not do something 
that they ought to have done—perhaps because of the relationship between the parties concerned—a duty 
might be found. Similarly, while it appears odd that someone may be liable for harms that someone else 
caused, the courts have nonetheless found that in limited circumstances people who have responsibility for, 
or control over, others may incur a duty in respect of the harms caused by these ‘third parties’.
4.2  Acts and omissions
Although Lord Atkin in Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] spoke of a duty of care arising in respect of ‘acts or 
omissions’,1 later interpretations suggest that he only meant omissions in situations where a pre-tort 
relationship gives rise to a positive obligation to act (and, therefore, where inaction would be a breach of that 
duty). This, broadly, is the law’s position today. A pre-existing relationship between the parties—for 
example, between parent and child, or school teacher and pupil, and contractual relationships or those 
created by statute—may create a positive duty to act.2 Outside specific pre-tort relationships, positive duties 
are not generally present in the tort of negligence and the courts seem unwilling to create them—most likely 
because negligence law developed against a social and political landscape that favoured individualism over 
collective responsibility.
In short, the exclusionary rule operates to prevent a duty being owed in respect of omissions. Lord Goff stated 
in Smith v Littlewoods [1987] that ‘the common law does not impose liability for what are called pure 
omissions’ (at 271). If no duty exists, there can be no liability, so no compensation for harm(s) caused by the 
failure of someone to do something. Generally speaking, the duties of care that arise in negligence are duties 
not to cause harm to others by our actions. These do not extend to positive duties to act to help others (or 
even to try), even when to do so would be easy. An example commonly cited in this respect (including in our 
chapter-opening scenarios) is that of a child lying face down in a puddle of water and potentially drowning. A 
passing stranger has no duty to take any steps to save that child, even if all it would take would be for them to 
grab the child’s arm and pull them out of the water to safety. The principle is starkly illustrated by the US case 
Osterlind v Hill [1928]. In that case, the claimant rented a canoe from the defendant and took it out into the 
water. The canoe overturned and the defendant, who was a strong swimmer, did nothing: he sat on the shore 
and watched the claimant drown. When sued in negligence it was found that he owed no duty of care, despite 
the fact he had rented out the canoe.3
p. 78
1
2
3
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 4 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
Many people are shocked that the adult in the scenario described earlier would have no duty of care 
towards the child. Should this be the case, in your opinion? Do you think that the way the law operates 
might actually discourage people from going to the assistance of others? Allen Linden, a Canadian 
scholar, points out that this rule is ‘particularly incomprehensible in an age when everyone carries a 
cell phone and can call for help without any risk whatsoever to him- or herself’.4 Do you agree?
↵
It is the ‘pure’ notion of omissions that concerns us here; that is, not those omissions which happen in 
the context of a relationship in which an obligation to act arises. In some circumstances, there would be a 
duty to go to the rescue of the child in a puddle—if there was a pre-tort relationship that meant a duty to take 
positive action existed, such as if the parent or carer of the child was the person walking by,5 or if the 
defendant had in some way ‘assumed responsibility’ for the claimant.6 This general exclusion of liability for 
‘pure’ omissions has been restated many times in case law—most notably by Lord Hoffmann in Stovin v Wise 
[1996]:
There are sound reasons why omissions require different treatment from positive conduct. It is one 
thing for the law to say that a person who undertakes some activity shall take reasonable care not to 
cause damage to others. It is another thing for the law to require that a person who is doing nothing 
in particular shall take steps to prevent another from suffering harm from the acts of third parties … 
or from natural causes. (at 943)
He goes on to identify political, moral and economic reasons why no duty should be owed in such 
circumstances:
In political terms it is less of an invasion of an individual’s freedom for the law to require him to 
consider the safety of others in his actions than to impose upon him a duty to rescue or protect. A 
moral version of this point may be called the ‘Why pick on me?’ argument. A duty to prevent harm to 
others or to render assistance to a person in danger or distress may apply to a large and 
indeterminate class of people who happen to be able to do something. Why should one be held liable 
rather than another? In economic terms, the efficient allocation of resources usually requires an 
activity should bear its own costs. If it benefits from being able to impose some of its costs on other 
people (what economists call ‘externalities’), the market is distorted because the activity appears 
cheaper than it really is. So liability to pay compensation for loss caused by negligent conduct acts as 
a deterrent against increasing the cost of the activity to the community and reduces externalities. 
But there is no similar justification for requiring a person who is not doing anything to spend money 
on behalf of someone else. Except in special cases (such as marine salvage) English law does not 
reward someone who voluntarily confers a benefit on another. So there must be some special reason 
why he should have to put his hand in his pocket. (at 943–4)
4
p. 79
5
6
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 5 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
↵
Lord Hoffmann suggests that the rule against liability in the context of pure omissions is an application 
of the ‘Why pick on me?’ aspect of modern life. After all, why should the burden to go to the assistance of 
anyone else be placed on one particular person purely because they were in that particular place at that 
particular time?
Pause for reflection
If several people are in a situation where they could prevent someone else from coming to harm, but 
no one actually does anything, should all of them be potentially liable for failing to help? Or does the 
fact that so many people could have done something indicate that we should not impose a positive 
obligation on any one of them?
In Stovin v Wise, Lord Nicholls refers to these people (who do not help) as ‘callous bystander[s]’ (at 
931). However, he continues: ‘something more is required than being a bystander. There must be an 
additional reason why it is fair and reasonable that one person should be regarded as his brother’s 
keeper7 and have legal obligations in that regard’—do you agree?
While there may be arguments made against a general exclusionary principle in respect of pure omissions, 
the rule was reiterated by the House of Lords in Sutradhar v National Environmental Research Council [2006]. 
The claimant suffered arsenic poisoning after drinking water from an irrigation well, which had been tested 
for toxins (but not arsenic) on behalf of the British Government by the British Geological Survey (BGS). The 
claimant asserted that BGS had a duty to test for arsenic (particularly as arsenic-contaminated water was a 
major environmental problem, affecting 35–77 million of Bangladesh’s inhabitants). The law lords held that 
no duty was owed in respect of BGS’s omission to test for arsenic. Indeed, Lord Hoffmann found that ‘BGS 
owed no positive duties to the government or people of Bangladesh to do anything. They can only be liable for 
the things they did … not for what they did not do’ (at [27]).
Wrongly not doing something that you should have done (an omission or nonfeasance), is to be contrasted 
with wrongly doing something (an act or misfeasance). Whether a case is one or the other depends either on 
the nature of the relationship between the claimant and defendant or the activity being undertaken and is 
closely linked to the notion of proximity (or closeness of relationship) that threads through all aspects of the 
duty question and in particular the so-called ‘problematic’ duty areas.
The courts have even found that there is no duty to go to the rescue of another who is about to injure 
themself accidentally, or even to shout to warn them: as Lord Keith said in Yuen Kun Yeu v Attorney General of 
Hong Kong [1988], there will be no liability ‘on the part of one who sees another about to walk over a cliff with 
his head in the air and forbears to 
↵
shout a warning’ (at 192).8 This stands in direct contrast to most civil 
law jurisdictions, in which such a duty is workably imposed upon citizens, even in relation to strangers. 
Article 223-6 of the French Code Penal, for example, makes it a criminal offence not to try to assist someone in 
danger (as long as doing so would not mean taking undue risks to your own safety), which also translates 
p. 80
7
p. 81
8
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 6 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
into a civil obligation (and therefore potentially liability) when this does not occur.9 In the UK, only when 
someone does act (i.e. they begin to attempt a rescue) does a duty become attached to them—they become 
obliged not to make the (claimant’s) situation worse than it already was.10
Pause for reflection
Consider how a duty to rescue could work in practice in relation to the example of the drowning child. 
What would such a duty actually consist of? Would it be a duty to save the child or a duty to try to save 
the child by taking reasonable (but not dangerous) steps? Do you think there is a good reason why we 
should not owe this kind of duty? In any case, could we protect people from liability if they did try to 
help—by statute, for example? A number of US, Canadian and Australian states and territories have 
passed what are called ‘Good Samaritan’ statutes which provide those who try to help with an 
‘immunity from suit’ (i.e. they cannot be sued for any consequences of trying to help).11 Do you think 
the same should happen here?
The UK’s Social Action, Responsibility and Heroism Act 2015 perhaps goes a little way towards this. 
While it does not create a duty to go to another’s assistance where no duty previously existed, it impels 
the court, when considering whether any person who does so was in breach (i.e. fell below the 
expected standard of care), to consider that person’s ‘social action’ (s 2) and/or ‘heroism’ (s 4). 
Though not providing ‘immunity from suit’, the Act may protect some of those who offer assistance. 
Whether what the Act contains is any different from existing common law principles that courts have 
always considered, is another question (see further section 8.5).
The rule that says that you are not obliged to go to someone’s aid, even when it would be easy to do so, 
surprises many law students. It also lies behind what we may term ‘rescuer anxiety’. Many people faced with 
a situation in which they could intervene to help someone are often scared to, fearing that if they help, they 
may end up becoming liable for not being able to 
↵
protect/save the person. In fact, this fear reflects an 
inaccurate understanding of the law. One can only be liable, once stepping in to help, for positive actions that 
make the situation worse than it was before the intervention. Liability, however, is different from owing a 
duty of care. Liability simply means having legal responsibility for one’s actions and only attaches once all the 
elements of a tort are made out by the claimant. So, for example, while someone who intervenes may owe a 
duty not to make the situation worse, their actions would still be judged against those of a ‘reasonable person’ 
in the circumstances (and so if a reasonable person would have tried to save the child in the same way, there 
will be no breach of duty and therefore no liability to pay compensation).
9
10
11
p. 82
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 7 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
Pause for reflection
If there was a duty to try and help, what would someone have to do to breach that duty? Failing to do 
anything at all might be a breach but this will depend on the circumstances. For example, say you 
walk down the high street late at night and happen to witness a mugging. If a general duty to rescue 
existed, your duty would be to try and do something to help, if you can—the least you could do is try to 
call the police or alert other people to what’s happening—you would not have to take steps to stop the 
mugging yourself, as this may put you in danger. Why shouldn’t this kind of duty be imposed on 
people? What does it say about our society and its values that such a duty is not imposed?
All this said, there are—as ever—some limited exceptions to the general exclusionary rule. These fall under 
three general headings:
control;
assumption of responsibility;
creation (or adoption) of risks.12
In one way or another, these exceptions increase the degree of proximity between the claimant and 
defendant, creating a relationship between them in which the foreseeability of harm becomes greater, 
therefore justifying the defendant’s potential liability to that specific claimant for not doing something that 
they could or should have done.
4.2.1  Control
When we speak of control in this sense, we mean those situations where it is arguable that the defendant 
should owe a duty to the claimant because they exercise a high degree of control over them, or have express 
responsibility for them. A parent or carer of a small child, for example, has a sufficient degree of control over/ 
responsibility for their child such that they 
↵
ought to step in to try and help them if they were drowning 
in a pool of water.13 However, this exception also extends to situations where it can be said that the 
defendants, because they exercise control over the person harmed, owe them a positive duty to take steps to 
ensure they are not harmed by themselves or by anyone else. In so doing, it clearly overlaps in part with the 
‘assumption of responsibility’ category, discussed in the next section.
An example can be seen in Reeves v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2000].14
12
p. 83
13
14
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 8 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Reeves v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2000] 1 AC 360 (HL)
A man called Martin Lynch committed suicide while in police custody. His partner claimed that the 
police had owed him a duty to prevent this from happening. Previous case law (see Kirkham v Chief 
Constable of Greater Manchester [1990]) had established that a duty of care was owed in respect of 
suicide attempts of prisoners known to be mentally ill, but a doctor had found Mr Lynch to be of 
sound mind. The police, who clearly owed him a duty of care not to physically harm him by their 
actions, argued that they owed him no duty of care in respect of his suicide because he was not 
mentally ill, and had deliberately taken his own life, even though the opportunity for him to do so had 
only arisen from their own carelessness.
A majority of the House of Lords disagreed, holding that the police’s duty to prisoners in custody did 
extend to a positive duty to take reasonable steps to assess the suicide risk of all prisoners. This was 
justified by the degree of control exercised over prisoners in custody and the known (high) risk of 
suicide, even among those without a known mental illness. However, the court also considered the 
deliberate nature of the prisoner’s actions, finding him partially responsible for his own death. The 
damages awarded were consequently reduced by 50 per cent.15
In a later case also involving a suicide in police custody, it was held that Reeves did not mean that the police 
have a duty of care requiring them to treat all prisoners as a suicide risk. In Orange v Chief Constable of West 
Yorkshire Police [2001], a man committed suicide by hanging himself with his belt from a grille on the door in 
a police cell after being arrested and detained for being drunk and disorderly. His widow claimed that the 
police had owed a duty to take away any means of suicide from him, such as his belt, and that they should 
have watched him more carefully. The Court of Appeal held that the duty from Reeves was only to take 
reasonable steps to assess whether a prisoner posed a suicide risk, and to act accordingly. As the police had no 
real reason to think that this particular prisoner would attempt suicide, the duty did not arise in this case. 
This distinction was later approved by the European Court of Human Rights in Keenan v UK [2001].16 In 
Savage v South Essex Partnership NHS Trust [2008], the House of Lords found that a similar positive duty, based 
↵
on Article 2 ECHR, was owed to a patient detained in a mental hospital who had negligently been 
allowed to abscond, later committing suicide.17
Pause for reflection
Despite their differing outcomes, the facts of Reeves and Orange are very similar. Considering what we 
have said about the concept of duty being used as a ‘control device’, could it be argued that the Court 
of Appeal in Orange was seeking to ‘put the brakes on’ what could potentially be an expanding 
15
16
p. 84
17
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 9 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
category of liability? Is it realistic to expect the police to owe a duty to all prisoners in their custody 
(and therefore under their control) to prevent them from attempting suicide? If not, why not? What 
positive obligations would this impose on the police, and are they unreasonable?18
Arguably, because the risk of suicide in custody is known to be high, the police should monitor all 
prisoners, even those without a history of mental illness (especially when they are first admitted), 
should design cells to minimise the risk of suicide and should remove items from prisoners (e.g. 
belts) that they could use to harm themselves. However, this must be balanced against the resources 
and time available to the police and a respect for the judgements they make in relation to who is at 
risk and who is not. Imposing an undue burden on the police to constantly monitor every prisoner 
might detract from their other functions. Again, however, it is important to note that imposing a duty 
of care is not enough to establish liability in the tort of negligence. We might again ask what such a 
duty would consist of—would it be a duty to prevent all suicides in custody or merely a duty to take 
reasonable steps to try to ensure that prisoners do not commit suicide? Consider Nyang v G4S Care & 
Justice Services Ltd and others [2013], where, despite there being a duty in respect of the many 
omissions in relation to the care and assessment of the detainee claimant, his case failed because 
those omissions were deemed not to have caused his suicide.
4.2.2  Assumption of responsibility
As already stated, this category has obvious links with ‘control’. When the defendant can be said to have 
‘assumed responsibility’ for the claimant’s wellbeing or safety, it seems obvious that positive obligations (in 
the form of a duty of care) should arise. The most common types of assumed responsibility (as opposed to 
more naturally arising relationships of responsibility, such as parent/child, which are better thought of as 
falling into the ‘control’ category) are those that arise out of a contract or from employment relationships.
Costello v Chief Constable of Northumbria Police [1999] 1 All ER 550 (CA)
A female police constable was attacked by a prisoner in a cell. Despite her calls for help, a police 
inspector in the vicinity did not come to her aid. Costello alleged that the police inspector owed a duty 
to assist a fellow officer when in trouble.
The Court of Appeal agreed. Police officers assume a responsibility to one another to ‘watch each 
other’s back’. Where a police officer’s omission might lead to avoidable harm being suffered by a 
fellow officer, a positive duty to act would be imposed. Thus, in failing to act, the police inspector had 
breached that duty and the Chief Constable was vicariously liable.19
18
p. 85
19
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 10 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Another way that someone can assume responsibility for the wellbeing of someone else is by their actions. 
Put another way, what someone does in relation to someone else can indicate, by conduct, an assumption of 
responsibility. A clear example of this is seen in Barrett v Ministry of Defence [1995].
Barrett v Ministry of Defence [1995] 1 WLR 1217 (CA)
A naval pilot stationed on a remote Norwegian base where extreme drunkenness had become 
commonplace had been celebrating his 30th birthday and a promotion when he became so drunk that 
he collapsed. The officer on duty ordered that he be taken to his bed—however, no one stayed to 
watch over him and he later choked to death on his own vomit.
At first instance, it was ruled that the senior officers had breached their duty to prevent irresponsible 
drinking on the base, but the damages to be awarded would be reduced by 25 per cent to account for 
Barrett’s own contributory negligence.
The Court of Appeal agreed. However, to them, the senior officers’ duty (and, through the doctrine of 
vicarious liability, that of the Ministry of Defence) was not owed in relation to the failure to prevent or 
discourage excessive drinking, as the court believed that adults should take responsibility for 
themselves in this respect. Rather, the duty was owed in relation to the duty officer’s failure to have 
someone stationed to watch Barrett while he slept (a different omission) because, by that point, 
responsibility for his safety had been assumed:
[i]n the present case I would reverse the judge’s finding that the defendant was under a duty 
to take reasonable care to prevent the deceased from abusing alcohol to the extent he did. 
Until he collapsed, I would hold that the deceased was in law alone responsible for his 
condition. Thereafter, when the defendant assumed responsibility for him, it accepts that the 
measures taken fell short of the standard reasonably to be expected. It did not summon 
medical assistance and its supervision of him was inadequate. (Beldam LJ at 1225)
The Court of Appeal also considered that more responsibility for his death lay with the deceased than 
with the officers, and reduced his damages by two-thirds.
Counterpoint
On closer inspection, the ratio of Barrett suggests that had no one found the naval officer when he was 
drunk or—more specifically, as this is what the case turns on—taken him back to his room, no one 
would have assumed responsibility and therefore no duty of care would or could have arisen. Can this 
be right? What this means is that had he fallen unconscious outside and been left to freeze to death, 
either because he had not been found or because whoever did see him chose to ignore his plight and 
p. 86
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 11 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
walk past (a ‘pure’ omission), no duty of care would have been owed. Would it be better to say that this 
was a situation in which the superior officers had ‘control’, and therefore should have done what they 
could to prevent excessive drinking? Or is it right that individual responsibility is taken into account 
only until the point when someone else intervenes?
4.2.3  Creating or adopting risks
The final exception in relation to omissions is based on the creation or adoption of a risk. When a defendant— 
even accidentally—creates a dangerous situation, a positive duty to try and deal with that danger may be 
imposed. In Capital & Counties plc v Hampshire County Council [1997], it was found that a fire service will only 
owe a duty to a property owner when it creates the danger in the first place or where its positive actions upon 
responding to an emergency make the situation worse. In this case, the county council was vicariously liable 
for the fire chief’s decision to turn off a sprinkler system on the claimant’s property, thereby allowing the fire 
to spread more rapidly than it would have had the sprinkler system still been operational. This general point 
flows through the law on omissions.20
More recently, in Tindall v Chief Constable of Thames Valley Police [2024], the Supreme Court refused to find a 
duty after police officers who had responded to a traffic accident in which a car had skidded on a patch of 
black ice, crashing and injuring the driver, removed a warning sign upon leaving the scene, resulting in a 
further traffic accident on the ice which killed the claimant. Though the officers’ ‘ineffectual’ intervention 
was considered by the court to be a ‘serious dereliction of their public duty owed to society at large’ (at [20]), 
this did not translate into an individual duty of care owed to the claimant, as the police had not made ‘matters 
worse by acting in a way that creates an unreasonable and reasonably foreseeable risk of physical injury’ to 
him (at [56]). Their failure to leave the warning sign was an omission to which no duty could attach.
Watch our video ‘But they’re meant to protect us!’ where we discuss the different approaches the courts have 
taken to claims against the police, and whether these can be justified.
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 4: But they’re meant to protect us!
In terms of ‘adopting’ risks, Goldman v Hargrave [1967]21 illustrates a similar idea. Here, a tree caught fire 
after being struck by lightning. The landowner ensured that the tree was cut down, but decided to let it burn 
itself out and took no further precautions to prevent the fire spreading. Therefore, although he did not cause 
the fire, in taking no 
↵
further steps to completely extinguish it he adopted the risk of it spreading (in a 
similar way to assuming responsibility for someone else he had, in a sense, assumed responsibility for the 
20
21
p. 87
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 12 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
risk). Extensive damage was caused to a neighbouring property after the fire was revived by the wind. The 
Privy Council found that a duty of care was owed in relation to adopted dangers on one’s land when that 
danger could spread to a neighbour’s land.
4.2.4  Summary of when a duty of care may be found in respect of omissions
This is summarised in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1 When a duty of care may be found in respect of omissions
Duty of care
General rule: no duty of care
Exceptions:
Smith v Littlewoods [1987]
Stovin v Wise [1996]
Sutradhar v National Environmental Research Council 
[2006]
Control exercised over claimant by defendant
Reeves v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2000]
Assumption of responsibility for claimant’s welfare by 
defendant
Costello v Chief Constable of Northumbria Police [1999]
Barrett v Ministry of Defence [1995]
Creation or adoption of a risk
Capital & Counties plc v Hampshire County Council [1997]
Goldman v Hargrave [1967]
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-4-2>.
4.3  Liability for acts of third parties
4.3.1  The general rule
There is no general duty to prevent other people causing damage. After all, why should someone owe a duty of 
care in respect of harm inflicted on another by a third party? Again, however, there are exceptions to this 
general rule, many of which relate to and overlap with those already discussed in the context of omissions, 
and stem from either a special or pre-tort relationship. For example, it is often because someone has not done 
something (an omission) that allows a third party the chance or opportunity to do something that they 
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 13 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
otherwise might not have done, this being what leads to the harm suffered.22 The question for the courts is 
similar—in what circumstances should we depart from the general rule that people should not be liable for 
the actions of third parties?
4.3.2  When is there liability for the acts of third parties?
The law imposes liability for the acts of third parties in exceptional circumstances. In such circumstances, 
one of the logistical problems that might have been encountered—in relation to when or whether a defendant 
should be liable for the actions of someone else—is broadly met by the content of the duty being a ‘duty to 
control the third party’ or a ‘duty to safeguard a dangerous thing’. However, this does not prevent there being 
causation problems—as we will see, a later act of a third party may actually operate to break the chain of 
causation back to the defendant (or may affect what damages can be paid if thought to be a supervening, 
rather than intervening event).23 There is a very fine line between the consideration of a third party’s actions 
as a duty issue or a causation issue and often the questions we ask are part and parcel of the same thing.24 
Some guidance can be gleaned from Lord Reid in Home Office v Dorset Yacht Co Ltd [1970] where he said that 
an act of a third party:
must have been something very likely to happen if it is not to be regarded as a novus actus 
interveniens breaking the chain of causation. I do not think that a mere foreseeable possibility is or 
should be sufficient, for then the intervening human action can more properly be regarded as a new 
cause than as a consequence of the original wrongdoing. (at 1030)25
Lord Goff (in Smith v Littlewoods [1987]) suggested that a duty in respect of a third party’s actions can arise in 
four circumstances:
where there is a special relationship between the defendant and the claimant;
where there is a special relationship between the defendant and the third party, such as a relationship 
of control or supervision;
where someone creates a ‘source of danger’ that may be ‘sparked’ by a third party;
where there is a failure to take steps to abate a known danger created by a third party.26
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-4-3>.
4.4  Exceptional circumstances
We will look in turn at examples from each of the categories Lord Goff suggested.
22
p. 88
23
24 
25
26
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 14 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
4.4.1  A special relationship between defendant and claimant
Where the defendant and the claimant have a special (pre-tort) relationship, that is a relationship in which a 
sufficient degree of proximity, or an assumption of responsibility, can be found to justify the imposition of a 
duty of care from one to the other, a duty may arise in 
↵
relation to the activities of a third party. Such a 
relationship may be defined by a contract between the parties. For example, in Stansbie v Troman [1948], the 
claimant employed the defendant to decorate her premises. When she went out, she specifically requested 
that the decorator lock up after himself when he left. He failed to do so and she was subsequently burgled. The 
court found that the contractual relationship between them was enough to create the necessary proximity for 
the imposition of a duty on the defendant. Put simply, because of the relationship between them, he had a 
duty to lock the premises when he left to prevent a burglary by a third party.27 In a more recent case, the 
owners of a London hotel were found to have assumed responsibility for their guests’ safety—even in the 
context of a violent overnight robbery committed by a third party who had entered the hotel for that 
purpose.28
Compare, however, P Perl (Exporters) Ltd v Camden London Borough Council [1984]. Here, two adjoining 
buildings were owned by Camden Council, one of which was leased by the claimant—the other was empty 
and unlockable. Thieves entered the unlocked premises, made a hole in the wall separating the two buildings 
and burgled the claimant’s property. The Court of Appeal found that the council owed no duty in respect of 
the third parties’ (the burglars’) actions. Despite it being foreseeable that some harm might be caused by 
leaving their property unlocked, this was not enough to establish the necessary proximity between the 
defendant and the claimant.
Notably, however, this case falls into a clear group of cases in which property owners were not found—for 
various reasons—liable for the actions of third parties. This suggests that there may be underlying policy 
reasons for such decisions, not least the fact that property-owning claimants might be expected to have 
insurance.29 However, presumably, all property owners might be expected to be insured, meaning that there 
are equally valid competing policy reasons in these cases.
The requisite proximity may also stem from an express or implied undertaking made by the defendant to the 
claimant. In such circumstances—for example, where the defendant promised not to do something that may 
endanger the claimant in some way—it seems appropriate that a duty should arise. In Swinney v Chief 
Constable of Northumbria Police [1997], the Court of Appeal found that the police owed a duty of care not to 
leak confidential information about the claimant, a police informant, because she may be harmed by those 
about whom she had given information. Such undertakings can also be implied, as in Costello where it was 
found that one police officer has a duty to assist another if they come under attack from a third party in police 
custody.
However, it is also evident that there must be a direct undertaking by the defendant for a duty to arise in these 
circumstances. In a string of police cases including Hill v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [1989], Osman v 
Ferguson [1993] and Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales Police [2015], for example, no duty was owed by 
police to claimants who were victims of crimes committed by third parties. In these cases, there was a general 
duty to 
↵
the public at large, but no duty existed to protect specific claimants, as no promise—express or 
implied—had been made.30
p. 89
27
28
29
p. 90
30
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 15 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The idea that there must indeed be a specific undertaking is clearly seen in Palmer v Tees Health Authority 
[1999].
Palmer v Tees Health Authority [1999] Lloyd’s Rep Med 351 (CA)
Mrs Palmer alleged that the defendant health authority had been negligent in its assessment of a 
mentally ill patient—Armstrong—who kidnapped, sexually assaulted, killed and mutilated her 4- 
year-old daughter Rosie upon his release from a secure unit. While under treatment for his illness, 
Armstrong stated that he had sexual feelings towards children and threatened to abduct and murder a 
child. Post-release, he failed to attend an outpatient’s appointment.
The Court of Appeal, relying on Hill, found that the health authority owed neither Mrs Palmer nor 
Rosie a duty of care, as the necessary proximity between the parties did not exist. The child was not 
identifiable as a potential victim (like in Hill), meaning the health authority could have done nothing 
to prevent her murder, other than keep the patient detained. There was no special relationship that 
could give rise to a duty of care.
In his judgment in Palmer, Stuart-Smith LJ said that ‘once rules are established, it is not open to the courts to 
extend the accepted principles of proximity simply because the facts of a given case are particularly 
horrifying or heart-rending’ (at 7). Nevertheless, it appears strange to us that the requisite proximity could 
not be found—or was not even argued on appeal—from the fact that Rosie lived in the same street as 
Armstrong.31
Following Palmer, it was argued in K v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] that in situations 
where ‘exceptionally serious’ risks are posed by a known third party, sufficient proximity could exist between 
an injured claimant and a defendant whose negligence fails to prevent the harm occurring. Here a Kenyan 
man, who had been imprisoned for several violent crimes and was due to be deported, was released early by 
the Secretary of State. The claimant, who was subsequently raped by the man, sued the Secretary of State 
alleging that the decision to release him early was negligent, as he posed a known risk of committing a 
violent crime. The Court of Appeal found that because the victim was unidentifiable to the defendant, there 
was no relationship of proximity between them, following Hill and Palmer, and this was not changed by the 
seriousness of the risk, even where it was clearly known by the defendant that such a risk existed.
Pause for reflection
Do you think it is right that the claimants in cases like Palmer and K have no cause of action? Where a 
psychiatric patient makes known his wish to harm a child, should he be released? Why was the 
criminal in K released before deportation? Surely both men did ‘the very thing that was 
↵
likely to 
31
p. 91
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 16 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
happen’ upon their release? As we have seen from Lord Reid in Dorset Yacht, this is, in different 
circumstances, enough to create a duty.32 We would argue that simply because there was no 
undertaking between the defendant and the claimant, this should not mean that the claimants in 
cases like Palmer and K must fail. The crimes committed were just as severe, and the defendant’s 
negligence just as intense, as they would have been if the criminal had told the defendant who he was 
intending to attack. Arguably, also, preventative measures would have been easy to take in each of the 
cases.
In any case, as we see from Osman v Ferguson,33 even where the victim is clearly identifiable (thus 
creating the requisite proximity), a positive duty to act may not arise for policy reasons. What policy 
reasons exist in relation to these cases?
The principle that a duty of care will not exist even where a potential victim is known to the defendant unless 
a specific undertaking has been given was underlined by the House of Lords in Mitchell v Glasgow City Council 
[2009]. Mitchell, a 72-year-old man, was beaten and killed with a stick or iron bar by his 60-year-old 
neighbour, Drummond. Both were tenants of the defendant, which had long been aware of Drummond’s 
anti-social and hostile behaviour, including death threats made to Mitchell. Having issued many previous 
warnings, a further serious incident made the defendants summon Drummond to a meeting, where he was 
threatened with eviction if his anti-social behaviour continued. Leaving the meeting angry, Drummond 
returned home and attacked Mitchell. Acting on his behalf, Mitchell’s widow contended that the council owed 
a duty of care to inform him the meeting had taken place and warn both him and the police of the potential 
danger. The law lords found that the council owed Mitchell no duty of care:
[a] duty to warn another person that he is at risk of loss, injury or damage as the result of the 
criminal act of a third party will only arise where the person who is said to be under that duty has by 
his words or conduct assumed responsibility for the safety of the person who is at risk. (Lord Hope at 
[29])
Given the high degree of foreseeability of harm, coupled with the council’s proximate relationship (to both 
the claimant and the third party), as well as what looks like assumption of responsibility, it is not apparent to 
us that this is a clear-cut case where no duty should be owed.34 More recently, in Poole Borough Council v GN 
[2019],35 the Supreme Court found that, despite knowledge of serious anti-social behaviour and violence 
from a neighbouring family towards the (child) claimants in council-arranged housing, this did not amount 
to an 
↵
assumption of responsibility. Therefore, the council had no duty to protect the claimants from 
foreseeable harm. In contrast is the Court of Appeal decision in Selwood v Durham County Council and others 
[2012]. Here, a psychiatric patient threatened to kill the claimant social worker if he came into contact with 
her, though she was not informed of this threat. When she attended a case conference dealing with one of the 
patient’s children, he stabbed her repeatedly. At first her claim was struck out, the decision relying in part on 
Mitchell. However, the Court of Appeal unanimously allowed her appeal, finding that assumption of 
32
33
34
35
p. 92
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 17 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
responsibility need not be express or implied from conduct, it could also be inferred from the circumstances, 
and that the judge failed to consider whether the defendants’ policy document36 and/or working 
arrangements inferred such an assumption.
Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales Police [2015] (discussed in detail at section 6.3.1) demonstrates the 
clear overlap between the problematic notions of imposing liability for omissions and for the action of third 
parties. Counsel for the claimant had raised an exception to the general rule on omissions as one ground of 
appeal, arguing that the police could be said to have assumed responsibility for Ms Michael’s safety after the 
first 999 call, in respect of the third party, thus owing her a duty of care.
Lord Toulson, giving the leading judgment, retreats into the long line of established authorities in this area 
and notes the exceptions of ‘control’ and ‘assumption of responsibility’ (at [98]–[100]), eventually finding 
that an assumption of responsibility could not (and should not) be established:
It does not follow from the setting up of a protective system from public resources that if it fails to 
achieve its purpose, through organisational defects or fault on the part of an individual, the public at 
large should bear the additional burden of compensating a victim for harm caused by the actions of a 
third party for whose behaviour the state is not responsible. To impose such a burden would be 
contrary to the ordinary principles of the common law. (at [114])
Counterpoint
Arguably, collapsing the two areas of law into each other in that way led Lord Toulson to forget that 
additional exceptions, such as those discussed here, exist in relation to the actions of third parties. It 
is at least arguable that, as in the cases outlined earlier, a ‘special relationship’ existed between the 
defendant and claimant due to the nature of her call and the fact she would obviously rely on the 
police coming to her aid,37 even if that was not quite enough to amount to a ‘true’ assumption of 
responsibility. Being asked by a call handler (having dialled 999 while fearing an imminent violent 
attack) if she was able to lock the doors, and being told that the call would be passed on to the correct 
police force is, to us, clear indication that it was reasonable for Joanne Michael to rely on the police. 
Thus, they should have owed her a duty, despite the 
↵
fact the harm was eventually caused by a 
third party. Had her call been handled properly, it is unlikely that she would have been killed.38
Lord Kerr (dissenting) said that the logic of the idea—that unless there was an explicit promise by the 
police coupled with express reliance by Joanne Michael, assumed responsibility cannot arise—must 
be questioned:
36
37
p. 93
38
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 18 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Should someone in a vulnerable state, fearing imminent attack, who believes that the 
assurance of timeous assistance has been made when, through negligence on the part of the 
police, that impression has been wrongly created, be treated differently from another who 
has in fact received an explicit assurance of immediate help, if both have relied on what they 
believed to be a clear promise that police would attend and avert the apprehended danger? (at 
[165], emphasis added)
It would truly be an invidious distinction if—had the call handler said ‘help is on its way, don’t 
worry’—a duty of care could be found.39
4.4.2  A special relationship between defendant and third party
Again, when we speak of a ‘special relationship’ in this respect, we are talking about proximity. The more 
proximate (or close) the relationship between the defendant and the third party who caused the damage or 
harm, the more likely it is that a duty will be imposed on the defendant in respect of the third party’s actions. 
As with liability for omissions, proximate relationships in this context include those where there is a degree 
of control exercised over the third party by the defendant, or where it can be said that the defendant has 
‘assumed responsibility’ for the third party’s actions. Dorset Yacht illustrates this principle well.40
Home Office v Dorset Yacht Co Ltd [1970] AC 1004 (HL)
In this case the court had to consider whether the acts of third parties (young offenders detained on 
Brownsea Island just off the Dorset coast) broke the chain of causation between the defendants’ 
carelessness and the damage suffered by the claimants. The defendants, the boys’ supervisors (for 
whom the Home Office would be vicariously liable), negligently allowed a group of boys to escape and 
damage the claimants’ yachts moored in the harbour. The supervisory nature of the relationship 
created the requisite degree of proximity between the defendants and the third parties. Moreover, the 
damage suffered by the claimants was the direct consequence of this relationship ‘failing’: upon their 
escape, the boys did the exact thing that 
↵
might be expected of them—they attempted to steal a 
boat to get off the island. The chain of causation was therefore intact and, correspondingly, a duty of 
care was owed in respect of the boys’ actions. The duty arose because the actions of the boys following 
their negligent supervision were the thing ‘very likely to happen’ (Lord Reid at 1030).
39
40
p. 94
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 19 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Counterpoint
In the previous section we considered the cases of Palmer and K, where no duty was found on the basis 
that the defendant–claimant relationship lacked proximity. In our view, however, it is equally 
arguable that those cases fit into the category of a special relationship (based on control or 
assumption of responsibility) existing between the defendant and the third party.
Did the claimants fail to establish a duty only because the cases were looked at the wrong way? We can 
see no real differences between these cases; if anything, the case in Palmer is stronger than that in 
Dorset Yacht. In the former, not only was the psychiatric patient still under the care of the health 
authority as an outpatient but he had expressed a specific wish to harm a child.
In Palmer, no proximity was found between the defendant and the claimant as there had been no 
assumption of responsibility towards the victim, who was merely one member of a class of people 
who might be at risk. Was this the right question to ask, given Lord Goff’s four exceptions to the 
general exclusionary rule for third party liability? Is it better to ask whether the defendant assumed 
responsibility for the conduct of (or the danger posed by) the third party?
Consider the Canadian case Doe v Metropolitan Toronto (Municipality) Commissioners of Police [1998], 
where the court found that a woman was owed a duty of care by the police in respect of her rape. She 
was one of many women in the potential target group of a serial rapist, who operated in a particular 
area of Toronto and was known as the ‘Balcony Rapist’ because he preferred to break into women’s 
flats via balconies. Potential victims were neither warned nor adequately protected owing to several 
significant failings on the part of the police. Was this case decided differently from Palmer and K 
because the woman was in a smaller and more readily identifiable group of potential victims? If so, 
how few potential victims need there be before it can be said a duty would be owed to each of them? In 
Palmer, it should be remembered, the victim lived on the same street as the man who killed her. How 
difficult would it have been to warn parents of children in the area? Or, if this is not the appropriate 
response, what else could the health authority have done? In our opinion, the fact that the claimant in 
Palmer could have been classified in a smaller group of potential victims should, like in Doe, have 
weighed more heavily with the court, as it is this feature that marks this case out from a law where 
the police would owe a duty in respect of all crimes committed by released prisoners and health 
authorities for psychiatric patients.41
4.4.3  Creating a source of danger
If a third party’s actions exacerbate a dangerous situation originally created by the defendant, subsequently 
causing the claimant harm, the defendant may owe the claimant a duty of care. For example, in Haynes v 
Harwood [1935], the defendant left his horses untethered on a busy street; they bolted when some children 
threw stones at them. A police officer was injured trying to control the horses; it was found that the defendant 
owed him a duty of care, as he had created a source of danger that was ‘sparked’ by the third parties.
41
p. 95
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 20 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
For a duty to arise in these circumstances, a special risk must be created. In Topp v London Country Bus [1993], 
the defendant’s employee left an unlocked minibus unattended outside a pub, with keys in the ignition. When 
the pub closed, a patron entered the minibus and drove it away carelessly, killing a pedestrian. However, the 
Court of Appeal found that the minibus was no more a source of danger than any other vehicle parked on the 
road at that time, therefore leaving the minibus did not create the type of risk that would create a duty of care 
as in Haynes.42
Pause for reflection
Is an unlocked bus with the keys in the ignition, left outside a pub at closing time, really less 
dangerous than an untethered horse? Is the outcome of this case surprising, particularly as the driver/ 
owners of the bus would be insured?
4.4.4  A failure to abate a known danger
In a sense, this is the reverse of the situation outlined earlier. There, we looked at instances where the 
defendant created a danger that could be ‘sparked’ by a third party. Here, we consider the situation where the 
danger is in fact created by a third party, but the defendant does nothing to abate it. The key word here is 
‘known’; unknown (or unknowable) dangers do not fall into this category. It can be explained as follows: if a 
defendant knows—or ought to have known—that a third party has created a danger that he should do 
something about (e.g. because it is on his property), then they will owe a duty of care to anyone injured as a 
result of that danger.43 Put simply, the defendant has a duty to do something about the danger in order to 
prevent injury (to person or property) to others.
In Smith v Littlewoods [1987], the claimant’s property was damaged by fire spreading from a derelict cinema 
owned by Littlewoods after vandals entered it at night and started a fire. The law lords—in particular Lord 
Goff—found that only where the danger was known, or 
↵
foreseeable, would a duty be owed.44 On the 
facts, no such duty was owed as Littlewoods had no reason to suspect the vandals’ entry and the only thing 
they could have done to prevent it would be to hire round-the-clock security, which would be 
disproportionate to the level of risk. As they had some security and had taken some precautions against 
trespassers, they had done all they reasonably should be expected to do.45 In this sense Smith v Littlewoods 
went a long way towards clarifying the law in this area in which liability had previously been judicially 
controlled using various other aspects of the law of negligence.46
In Clark Fixing Ltd v Dudley Metropolitan Borough Council [2001], the reasoning from Smith v Littlewoods was 
used to find a duty in exactly the extended circumstances envisaged by Lord Goff. In Clark, Dudley Council 
owned property which shared a roof with an adjoining property owned by the claimant. As in Smith, 
trespassers entered the council’s property and started a fire, which spread to the claimant’s property, causing 
substantial damage. The council, unlike the cinema owners in Smith, was aware that trespassers had entered 
the premises—and had started fires—on several previous occasions, and in fact had received complaints 
42
43
p. 96
44
45
46
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 21 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
about this from the claimants. The Court of Appeal therefore found that a duty was owed by the council, 
despite the harm being caused by third parties. Similarly, but without actual knowledge of the risk, a duty of 
care was found in Sandhu Menswear Co Ltd v Woolworths plc [2006], where the defendants had left piles of 
flammable material by storage units on an industrial estate, which when set alight had caused damage to the 
claimant’s property. Even though in Sandhu, unlike Clark, there was no evidence that fires had previously 
been lit by third parties, the court held that it was foreseeable that fires could be lit by people trespassing in 
the area and therefore a duty could be found.
Pause for reflection
As outlined in Chapter 2, a claimant has to prove not only that a duty was owed to them but that this 
was breached and that the breach caused the harm suffered by them. How is it possible, however, 
when the harm is the result of a third party’s actions, to establish that the defendant was the cause of 
the claimant’s harm?
Generally, this causation difficulty is overcome by the content of the duty—for example, it will be a 
‘duty to control a third party’ or a ‘duty to safeguard a dangerous thing’. When looked at this way, 
failure to control a third party or a dangerous thing (the breach) is what causes the claimant’s harm. 
Do you agree with this statement? And if so, how do we explain cases like Palmer or K?
Counterpoint
Claire McIvor calls ‘third party liability’ a ‘novel category of tortious liability’ that ‘evolved from a 
collection of disparate and isolated judicial decisions setting out ad hoc exceptions to the entrenched 
common law rules against liability for omissions and liability for the acts of others’.47 We agree, 
adding that the law defining if and when defendants owe a duty of care in respect of either an 
omission or for the actions of another seems to be based on judicial perceptions rooted 
wholeheartedly in the concept of individualism. While it may be admirable to suggest that people 
should only take responsibility for their own actions, this approach does not adequately encompass 
the fact that in many of the cases we have seen it may be more morally justifiable to adopt a broader 
conception of duty and allow breach to be used as a control on liability. Put simply, we would prefer 
the approach in these situations to be based on the level of fault or moral blameworthiness that could 
be attached to the defendant. McIvor is right to contend that due to ‘the improvised nature of its 
development, the current law on third party liability is unstructured, unprincipled and incoherent’.48
p. 97
47
48
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 22 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-4-4>.
4.5  Summary of when a duty of care may be found for the actions of 
third parties
This is summarised in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2 When a duty of care may be found for the actions of third parties
General rule: no duty 
of care
Exceptions (see Smith v Littlewoods [1987])
Proximity between defendant and claimant
Duty found in
Stansbie v Troman [1948]
Swinney v Chief Constable of Northumbria 
Police [1997]
Selwood v Durham County Council and others 
[2012]
But not in
P Perl (Exporters) v Camden London Borough 
Council [1984]
Palmer v Tees Health Authority [1999]
K v Secretary of State for the Home Department 
[2002]
Mitchell v Glasgow City Council [2009]
Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales 
Police [2015]
Proximity between defendant and third party
Duty found in
Home Office v Dorset Yacht [1970]
But not in
Palmer v Tees Health Authority [1999]
K v Secretary of State for the Home Department 
[2002]
Mitchell v Glasgow City Council [2009]
Creation of a source of danger
Duty found in
Haynes v Harwood [1935]
But not in
Topp v London Country Bus [1993]
Failure to abate a known danger
Duty found in
But not in
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 23 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
2
General rule: no duty 
of care
Exceptions (see Smith v Littlewoods [1987])
Clark Fixing Ltd v Dudley Metropolitan 
Borough Council [2001]
Sandhu Menswear Co Ltd v Woolworths plc 
[2006]
Everett v Comojo (UK) Ltd (t/a The 
Metropolitan) [2011]
Smith v Littlewoods [1987]
4.6  Conclusion
In this chapter we have looked at the separate—but closely linked—concepts of liability for omissions and for 
the actions of third parties. A general exclusionary rule operates in respect of both. However, as usual, there are 
exceptions to these rules.
In relation to omissions, a duty of care can be established where the defendant and claimant have a 
relationship making it appropriate to depart from the general rule. As we saw, such relationships include 
those where a degree of control is exercised over the claimant by the defendant, that is, where the 
responsibility for them is explicit, such as parent–child relationships or with people held in custody and who 
constitute a known suicide risk. They may also be defined by an assumption of responsibility. If the 
defendant actively assumes responsibility for the claimant’s wellbeing, this will usually be enough to 
establish a positive duty to act. Finally, we saw that positive obligations may arise in respect of omissions 
where a risk is created or adopted by a defendant.
Third party liability is controlled by similar concepts. Relationships between claimants and defendants are 
also important—the courts require a high degree of proximity before a duty will be imposed. This works in 
two ways: either there is sufficient proximity between the defendant and the claimant (e.g. as in many 
contractual relationships) that makes it appropriate for the defendant to be liable when a third party causes 
harm to the 
↵
claimant, or there is sufficient proximity between the defendant and the third party. As 
with omissions, this may come from there being a relationship of control and/or responsibility between the 
defendant and the third party. Again, in a similar way to liability for omissions, a defendant may be liable for 
the actions of a third party when they either have created a danger that a third party’s actions might cause 
harm or have failed to abate a known danger created by a third party.
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
Should a ‘Good Samaritan’ statute be passed in this country? What are the benefits of not having one?
p. 98
p. 99
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 24 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
3
4
→
→
→
→
→
In each of the following situations consider both whether there is a legal duty of care and whether there should 
be:
Iris, a 2-year-old child, falls into two feet of water. Pablo, an adult, walks by and offers no assistance. Iris 
drowns. What if Pablo is Iris’s father?
While out shopping, Indika’s 7-year-old daughter slips out of her hand and runs into the road causing a serious 
accident.
Chiumbo negligently leaves the door of his fireworks factory unlocked one night. Some children enter the 
factory and steal a large quantity of fireworks, which they light in the nearby park. This causes an explosion 
that seriously injures Ben who is walking his dog in the park.
Do the concepts of liberal individualism and personal autonomy carry more weight than collective or social 
responsibility? Should they?
In Smith v Littlewoods [1987], Lord Goff indicated that the legal treatment of omissions may one day need to 
be reconsidered. Was he correct?
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-4-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Answering the problem question
Consider again the problem question at the start of this chapter. Now having read about the topic, what 
would be your advice to the various parties?
Here are some pointers to get you started:
There are various claimants in this problem and various defendants. You should start by outlining who 
would claim against whom, and why.
Margaret (her estate) will claim against Amir (and the supermarket vicariously, see Chapter 20). Though 
there is no general duty to assist someone in trouble, had Amir ‘assumed responsibility’ towards Margaret?
Margaret will also claim against Kasim. The issues are similar to those against Amir, initially.
↵
 Jill and Heather will claim against Margaret. However, the harm they suffered was the result of a 
third party’s actions so it may be difficult to establish a duty.
Levi will also claim against Margaret. Even if a duty can be established here there may be tricky causation 
points (see Chapter 9) and a potential defence to the claim (see Chapter 10).
p. 100
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 25 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
If you need some more guidance:
See the annotated version of the problem with issues and cases to consider <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-4-annotated- 
problem-question-interactive>.
Check your answer against the suggested outline answer <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-4-answers-to-problem-question>.
Further reading
Literature on this area of law tends to focus on reform, highlighting inconsistencies and inadequacies in the existing 
law. Claire McIvor’s book is a great starting point from which to critique the law on third party liability, while Jeroen 
Kortmann provides excellent analysis of the principles of altruism and rescue in the context of English law. Chapter 3 
of the book contains a particularly good and persuasive critique of Lord Hoffmann’s reasoning/justifications in Stovin 
v Wise.
Carr, Nanci ‘Am I My Brother’s Keeper? How Technology Necessitates Reform of the Lack of Duty to Rescue or Duty to 
Report Laws in the United States’ (2019) 2 Boston University Public Interest Law Journal 117
Conaghan, Joanne ‘Challenging and Redressing Police Failures in the Context of Rape Investigations: The Civil Liability 
Route’ (2015) 5(1) feminists@law
Kortmann, Jeroen Altruism in Private Law: Liability for Nonfeasance and Negotiorum Gestio (OUP 2005)
Linden, Allen ‘Toward Tort Liability for Bad Samaritans’ (2016) 53 Alberta Law Review 837
McIvor, Claire Third Party Liability in Tort (Hart 2006)
Morgan, Jonathan, ‘Maintaining the Elegant Façade of the Acts–Omissions Distinction’ [2022] Cambridge Law Journal 
245
Randell, Melanie ‘Sex Discrimination, Accountability of Public Authorities and the Public/Private Divide in Tort Law: An 
Analysis of Doe v Metropolitan Toronto (Municipality) Commissioners of Police’ (2000–01) 26 Queen’s Law Journal 451
Reid, Elspeth ‘Smith v Littlewoods Organisation Ltd (1985)’ in Charles Mitchell and Paul Mitchell (eds) Landmark Cases 
in the Law of Tort (Hart 2010)
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-4-web-links?options=showName>.
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 26 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Notes
 
1. Donoghue is outlined in section 2.2—see in particular the discussion of Lord Atkin’s ‘neighbour principle’.
 
2. e.g. the Occupiers’ Liability Act 1957 fixes a positive duty on occupiers to ensure their premises are safe for lawful 
visitors (see section 11.2.1) and various statutory health and safety provisions impose positive duties on employers.
 
3. So, in our example scenario, no duty of care would be owed by the owner of the hire shop to do anything to assist 
the person in trouble. However, in light of later cases (e.g. the Canadian case The Ogopogo [1970]), a contractual 
relationship might now be enough to create a positive duty to act. See also Stansbie v Troman [1948] and Bailey and 
another v HSS Alarms [2000].
 
4. Allen Linden ‘Toward Tort Liability for Bad Samaritans’ (2016) 53 Alberta Law Review 837, 843. See also Nanci Carr 
‘Am I My Brother’s Keeper? How Technology Necessitates Reform of the Law of Duty to Rescue or Duty to Report Laws 
in the United States’ (2019) 2 Boston Uni Public Interest Law Journal 117.
 
5. See e.g. Carmarthenshire County Council v Lewis [1955], where the duty of parents was confirmed in the context of a 
claim against a school. From Carmarthenshire it can be seen that a similar duty arises in respect of schools when 
children are in their care: see also Barnes v Hampshire County Council [1969] and Phelps v Hillingdon London Borough 
Council [2001]. This positive obligation also extends to ensuring children’s educational and psychological needs and 
interests are met (Bradford-Smart v West Sussex County Council [2002]).
 
6. Most recently confirmed at the highest level in Robinson v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [2018]. See especially 
Lord Reed at [34].
 
7. The reference to being one’s brother’s keeper is biblical: God, after Cain had killed Abel, asked Cain where his 
brother was and Cain replied ‘Am I my brother’s keeper?’ (Genesis 4:9). The answer to Cain’s question differs according 
to one’s political and ethical standpoint. While some might answer ‘Yes, you are. WE are’—that is, we are all (and 
should be) responsible, at least to some extent, for the welfare of our fellow humans—others will respond differently, 
relying on conceptions of individual rather than collective responsibility to support the view that one should not have 
to expend time, energy or money on those who are not directly related (or proximate) to us in some way.
 
8. We can therefore infer that there would be no obligation in our example scenario for a bystander to take any 
measures to stop the man walking off the edge of the cliff, unless a pre-tort relationship existed between the parties. 
Nor must a doctor or nurse stop at the scene of an accident to help a stranger who might be injured or even dying 
(though see the Australian case Lowns v Woods [1996]). If they did stop and intervene, however, they may owe a duty 
not to make the situation worse. Simon Deakin, Angus Johnson and Basil Markesinis call this a ‘rather extreme 
position’, highlighting that the law fails to take into account either the magnitude of the harm that could be caused or 
the ease of preventing it (Tort Law (7th edn OUP 2012) 180).
 
9. The penalties apply to anyone who wilfully fails to offer assistance to a person in danger which he could himself 
provide without risk to himself or to third parties, or by initiating rescue operations. An example of this law in practice 
is where some press photographers at the scene of Princess Diana’s fatal car accident in Paris were investigated for 
deliberately avoiding providing assistance to endangered persons.
 
10. This is also the position that applies to the duty of care that the fire service or coastguard owe to individuals. See 
sections 6.5.1 and 6.5.5, respectively.
 
11. See Linden n4.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 27 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
12. Note that in Robinson v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire Police [2018] Lord Reed lists four exceptions to the rule 
in modern understanding—though this aligns with the three we list here, by splitting the third into two (at [34]).
 
13. Carmarthenshire County Council v Lewis [1955], though note that this appears not to stretch beyond situations 
where an express or implied undertaking to care for the child exists and is not based merely on e.g. blood 
relationships. See also Surtees v Kingston upon Thames Borough Council [1992].
 
14. Notably, this case is also an exception to the general absence of duty owed by the police as a public body, discussed 
in section 6.5.3.
 
15. For an explanation of the principles of contributory negligence, see section 10.4.
 
16. The duty of state authorities to protect prisoners with mental health problems was confirmed in Renolde v France 
[2009].
 
17. The daughter of the woman who killed herself was later awarded £10,000 from the NHS in a Human Rights Act 
claim: Anna Savage v South Essex Partnership NHS Trust [2010]. In Rabone v Pennine Care NHS Trust [2010], the Court of 
Appeal denied such a claim where the patient was voluntarily receiving inpatient treatment for her mental health but, 
due to the hospital’s negligence, was allowed on home leave, where she committed suicide. However, the Supreme 
Court overturned this, finding that the state has a positive obligation under Art 2 to prevent the suicide of voluntary 
mental patients and, though in Rabone the health trust admitted negligence and settled with the appellants (the 
patient’s parents), this did not prevent them being recognised as ‘victims’ for the purposes of s 7 of the Human Rights 
Act 1998 (Rabone and another v Pennine Care NHS Trust [2012]).
 
18. Consider, e.g., the findings of the Office for National Statistics that male prisoners in England and Wales are 3.7 
times more likely to die from suicide than the general population (‘Drug related deaths and suicides in prison custody 
in England and Wales: 2008 to 2016’ 25 July 2019). See also the Home Office report by Giles Lindon and Stephen Roe 
‘Deaths in police custody: A review of the international evidence’ October 2017.
 
19. See also Mullaney v Chief Constable of West Midlands [2001]. These cases are examples of an exception to the 
general rule that the police owe no duty of care, as discussed in Chapter 6. See further on vicarious liability Chapter 
20.
 
20. See further section 6.5.1. A good summary of the rule from Capital & Counties plc was given by Lady Paton in a 
Scottish appeal case on liability of the fire service: AJ Allan (Blairnyle) Ltd and another v Strathclyde Fire Board [2016].
 
21. Discussed in more detail in section 19.6.
 
22. See e.g. Home Office v Dorset Yacht Co Ltd [1970].
 
23. Section 9.2.3.
 
24. See Smith v Littlewoods [1987], as one example of a case that clearly highlights the difficulty courts have in 
categorising third party actions as either a duty or causation issue.
 
25. Note there has been some criticism of Lord Reid’s formulation—see e.g. Denning, Oliver and Watkins LJJ in Lamb v 
Camden London Borough Council [1981].
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 28 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
26. It should be clear from these categories where there is overlap between what is discussed here and in the earlier 
section on omissions. The first category, here, clearly has parallels with the idea of ‘assumption of responsibility’ in 
relation to omissions—and the others are even more obvious—so much so that you may find that other texts have 
some of the cases used to illustrate these ideas in the omissions section rather than in relation to third party liability 
and vice versa.
 
27. The principle was confirmed in Bailey and another v HSS Alarms [2000] and more recently in a claim worth £6.5 
million in Rushbond Plc v JS Design Partnership LLP [2021].
 
28. Al-Najar v The Cumberland Hotel (London) Ltd [2019]. Interestingly, in giving judgment, Dingemans J said ‘I have 
found the duty to exist by reason of the assumption of responsibility test set out in Robinson rather than by the use of 
the Caparo test’ (at [187]), suggesting that the move away from seeing Caparo as ‘the’ test for duty of care is well 
underway (see discussion at section 3.2).
 
29. Indeed, this point was explicitly acknowledged by Lord Denning MR in Lamb v Camden London Borough Council 
[1981], a case with similar facts to P Perl (Exporters) Ltd.
 
30. It should be noted here that there was a far higher degree of proximity in Osman and Michael than in Hill, though 
still not enough for the court to impose a duty on the police (see further section 6.5.3).
 
31. Compare Buck v Norfolk and Waveney Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust [2012], where it was held that a custody 
authority responsible for the negligent release of a psychiatric patient will not owe a duty to a victim unless that victim 
was identifiable.
 
32. Also see Lord Morris in Dorset Yacht, who said: ‘If a person who in lawful custody has made a threat, accepted as 
seriously intended that, if he can escape, he will injure X … a duty [will be owed] to X to take reasonable care to 
prevent escape’ (at 1039). Can parallels be drawn with those detained on mental health grounds? Compare the US 
case Tarasoff v Regents of the University of California [1976].
 
33. Also see Smith v Chief Constable of Sussex Police [2008] and Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales Police 
[2015].
 
34. Also see Hussain and another v Lancaster City Council [1999] and X & Y v London Borough of Hounslow [2009]. The 
latter case is discussed in sections 2.6 and 6.7.2. The Court of Appeal decision relied heavily on the findings in 
Mitchell.
 
35. Discussed in section 6.3.
 
36. Which specifically stated that there might be circumstances in which confidential information might need to be 
disclosed without a patient’s consent if the health or safety of a professional was at risk.
 
37. See Joanne Conaghan ‘Civil liability: addressing failures in the context of rape, domestic and sexual abuse’ 
Inaugural Lecture given at the University of Bristol on 19 February 2015. The full lecture can be viewed at 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=y1bawCpPr30 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y1bawCpPr30>.
 
38. Also see Martin Evans ‘Woman was murdered by stalker ex-boyfriend after police blunders, report finds’ The 
Telegraph 12 September 2018. There, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) found multiple failures in the 
police response to the victim’s reporting of worrying stalking behaviour by her ex-boyfriend. Contrast the response of 
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 29 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Warwickshire police to the death of Julia Mendes, also following a miscategorised 999 call, where it could be argued 
that no such assumption of responsibility occurred, yet the victim’s family were paid £21,687. See Diane Taylor ‘Police 
apologise to dead woman’s kin after failure to respond to 999 call’ The Guardian 5 January 2017.
 
39. See also Griffiths and others v Suffolk Police and another [2018].
 
40. Also see Vowles v Evans and another [2003] and Watson v British Boxing Board of Control Ltd [2001] in the context of 
sports officials.
 
41. Consider also the High Court’s decision (later upheld by the Supreme Court) in DSD v The Commissioner of Police for 
the Metropolis [2014], discussed at section 6.3.1 as well as in the lecture by Joanne Conaghan, referred to in n37.
 
42. Would the same be true where a cleaner left the door to a pub open one night (as in the scenario at the beginning of 
the chapter)? The legal question is whether she should be held responsible for the damage to the pub and, also, for 
the damage to the car parked on the same street. By analogy with Stansbie it might be fairly easy to establish the duty 
in relation to the stolen alcohol and damaged pub—but might Topp stand in the way of the car owner claiming 
successfully?
 
43. See, in the context of land torts, Sedleigh-Denfield v O’Callaghan [1940], Goldman v Hargrave [1967] and Leakey v 
National Trust [1980], section 19.6.1. Also compare the position of occupiers of premises under the Occupiers’ 
Liability statutes (Chapter 11).
 
44. Notably, although Smith v Littlewoods was a unanimous decision, each of the law lords reached their decision by 
different means.
 
45. Compare also Smith LJ’s judgment in the context of a knife attack in a nightclub in Everett v Comojo (UK) Ltd (t/a 
The Metropolitan) [2011], particularly [31]–[33].
 
46. Compare e.g. Lamb v Camden London Borough Council [1981] (third party’s acts too remote a consequence of the 
defendant’s breach (causation in law)), P Perl (Exporters) Ltd (no duty because the defendant could not be expected to 
control the actions of third parties) and King v Liverpool City Council [1986] (duty found but defendant not in breach as 
there was nothing they could reasonably have done to prevent the third parties’ actions).
 
47. Claire McIvor Third Party Liability in Tort (Hart 2006) 1.
 
48. ibid.
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
4. Special duty problems: Omissions and acts of third parties
Page 30 of 30
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
