8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 1 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0008
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter focuses on breach of duty. Breach occurs where a defendant has fallen below the particular standard of care 
demanded by the law. This is largely an objective test and is determined by comparing the actions of the defendant to those 
imagined to be done in the same circumstances by the so-called ‘reasonable man’. The questions to be answered are how the 
defendant ought to have behaved (what was the required standard of care) and how the defendant did behave (did they in fact 
fall below that standard).
Keywords: 
tort law, breach of duty, claim, negligence, standard of care
Problem question
Read this problem question carefully and keep it in mind while you are working through the 
chapter that follows. At the end of the chapter you will be able to apply what you have learnt to the 
problem question and advise the relevant parties.
Mpho and Gabriel have spent the afternoon on a charity walk alongside Little Amal who had been 
visiting Horsechester University.1 Gabriel, who has just passed his driving test, offers Mpho a lift 
home. On the journey home Gabriel is distracted by fireworks celebrating the end of term. He loses 
control of the car and crashes into a lamp post. Mpho suffers minor cuts and bruises and is taken to 
hospital for a check-up.
p. 212
1
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 2 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
(1)
(2)
At the hospital Aput is waiting to see a doctor. They have injured their right elbow. The doctor 
recommends surgery as ‘the best possible option’. It is well known that partial paralysis is a small but 
serious risk of the procedure. However, when Aput asks about any potential downsides, the doctor 
fails to answer. The operation goes ahead and is performed without negligence. Aput is now unable to 
bend their right arm.
Advise Mpho and Aput.
8.1  Introduction
Consider the following examples:
A cricketer hits a ball for six. It flies over the boundary fence hitting a passer-by on the head, causing 
serious injury.
A learner driver mistakes the accelerator for the brake and hits a tree, injuring her instructor.
An overworked junior doctor misreads the instructions on the back of a packet of drugs and injects a 
patient with 250 ml, rather than 25 ml as stated, paralysing the patient from the neck down.
↵
There are three vital ingredients of the tort of negligence: duty of care, breach of duty and damage 
caused by the breach (factual and legal causation). This chapter focuses on the second of these requirements 
—breach of duty.
Breach occurs where the defendant falls below the particular standard of care demanded by the law. 
Establishing this involves making a value judgement on the defendant’s behaviour—was the defendant 
driving too fast given the particular road conditions? Did the doctor follow the correct procedure or 
administer the correct drug? Was appropriate safety equipment provided by the employer, and so on? The key 
issue to be addressed is how and where the courts set the acceptable standard or level of care owed towards 
one’s neighbours. There are two questions to be considered.
How the defendant ought to have behaved in the circumstances—what was the required standard of 
care in these circumstances? This is often described as a matter of law.
How the defendant did behave—did they (as a matter of fact) fall below the standard of care required?
As the majority of cases turn largely on the facts at hand—the speed of the car and whether it was appropriate 
for the time of day, location and so on—it is difficult (although not impossible) to make generalisations about 
how the defendant ought to have behaved, that is where the standard of care will be set. Moreover, the relation 
of many everyday negligence cases issues to duty and causation will be straightforward and so liability will 
p. 213
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 3 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
turn on breach, on what the defendant should and did (or did not) do. As such, despite its practical 
importance the law here is relatively limited. The most we can do is identify a few broad and rather open- 
ended propositions. Indeed, Tony Weir argues:
decisions on breach are not citable as authorities; they are merely illustrations of the application of the 
indubitable rule that if one is under a duty at common law such care must be taken as is called for in 
all the circumstances.2
However, this only goes so far. While clearly the determination of whether a breach has occurred depends on 
the particular facts of the case, it is nevertheless possible to identify some broad principles that the courts use 
when seeking to define the appropriate standard of care, which give some indication as to what the law 
requires us to do in order to avoid causing harm to others.
Pause for reflection
Some of the most familiar negligence cases—that is the ones most often reported in the media— 
involve ‘freak accidents’ during entertainment events or school trips.3 These have often been followed 
by calls for a public inquiry (to investigate the cause of the tragedy and make recommendations to 
prevent similar accidents from happening in the future) or a review 
↵
of health and safety 
guidelines,4 as well as claims for compensation.5 In deciding these claims, the courts seek to strike a 
balance between ensuring safety and curtailing legitimate activities and/or commercial interests. The 
balance can be a tricky one:
Accidents happen, and sometimes they are what can be described as pure accidents in the 
sense that the victim cannot recover damages for the resulting injury because fault cannot be 
established. If the law were to set a higher standard of care than that which is reasonable … 
the consequences would quickly become inhibited. There would be no fêtes, no maypole 
dancing and none of the activities that have come to be associated with the English village 
green for fear of what might conceivably go wrong. (Scott-Baker LJ, Cole v Davies-Gilbert at 
[36])
As you are reading the cases in this and other chapters, consider where you think the line should be 
drawn. What factors do you think might have pushed the courts one way or another?
8.2  A test of reasonableness
The first thing to note about the standard of care in negligence is that it is not a standard of perfection. The 
standard allows for some errors and mistakes. As Lord Atkin held in Donoghue v Stevenson [1932]: ‘You must 
take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your 
2
3
p. 214
4
5
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 4 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
neighbour’ (at 580, emphasis added). The key requirement is that the defendant behaves reasonably. Of 
course, this simply prompts the question: what is reasonable behaviour? Or, put another way, what standard 
of care did the circumstances require?
The courts answer this question by comparing what the defendant has done to the imagined actions of the 
so-called ‘reasonable man’ and asking what a reasonable man in the position of the defendant would have 
done in the circumstances, If the defendant has done something that the reasonable man would not have done 
(or has omitted to do something that the reasonable man would have done) then they will be in breach of 
their duty (Hazell v British Transport Commission [1958] at 171). In short,
[n]egligence is the omission to do something which the reasonable man, guided upon those 
considerations which ordinarily regulate the conduct of human affairs, would do, or doing 
something which a prudent and reasonable man would not do. (Alderson B, Blyth v Birmingham 
Waterworks (1856) at 784)
↵
So who is this apparent paragon of virtue against whom all others are to be judged? Over the years 
various descriptions have been attempted, often involving some mode of transport: the reasonable man is 
‘the man on the Clapham omnibus’ (Greer LJ, Hall v Brooklands Auto-Racing Club [1933] at 224), ‘the man who 
in the evening pushes his lawnmower in his shirtsleeves’ (Lord Greer, Hall v Brooklands Auto-Racing Club 
[1933] at 224), a ‘traveller on the London underground’ (Lord Steyn, McFarlane v Tayside Health Board [1999] 
at 82) or, rather more grandly, he is ‘the anthropomorphic conception of justice’ (Lord Radcliffe, Davis 
Contractors v Fareham Urban District Council [1956] at 728).
Yet, while it is agreed that the reasonable man is neither all-seeing nor all-knowing and that, on occasions, 
he makes reasonable mistakes, there is less agreement (particularly among feminist legal scholars) about 
whether these qualities should be tied to the physical characteristics of a man. Moreover, it is clear that even if 
we adopt the more politically correct (if not less contentious) ‘reasonable person’ terminology, questions 
remain: what is her or his ethnicity, religion, class, sexual orientation, age, education, and so on?
Feminist critiques of the reasonable man
Feminist and other legal scholars have argued that despite claims to gender-neutrality, the standard 
of the reasonable man in fact embodies a male point of view and as such holds women to a standard 
devised without them in mind. This criticism goes beyond a dislike of the way the standard is 
expressed: ‘his gender-specificity is not just a linguistic convention, whereby both sexes are denoted 
by reference to the masculine: the reasonable man is, in fact, male’.6
What does this mean? There are a number of aspects to this critique. One focuses on the fact that the 
notion of the ‘reasonable man’ is not based on statistical evidence of what most people actually do 
think and do. Rather, it is a conception conjured up by the judges themselves embodying a standard 
set and considered appropriate by them. Given the continuing under-representation of women, ethnic 
p. 215
6
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 5 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
minorities and other non-traditional groups within the judiciary, particularly in its upper echelons, it 
is likely that the ‘reasonable man’ reflects the particular perspectives, assumptions and (possibly) 
prejudices of a subset of society—that is, those (white, middle-class men) who make up the judiciary.
More controversially, it is argued that the standard of reasonableness not only assumes but prioritises 
the ability to adopt a position of detached objectivity from which to weigh up the costs and benefits of 
a particular course of action—an ability traditionally (and, perhaps, essentially) associated with men. 
Assuming this is true, then the very idea of applying ‘a standard of reasonable care’, it is argued, 
seems to embody a peculiarly male way of thinking and to exclude differences in the way women 
think and act. As such, the problem is not with the language of the reasonable ‘man’, but with the very 
notion of ‘reasonableness’. On this view, it may well be ‘dangerously misleading’ to adopt the 
rebranding of the reasonable person—since it attributes a ‘false universality to what is in fact a partial 
and loaded standard’.7
↵
The truth of the matter is, of course, that there is no such individual as the reasonable man (or indeed 
person). The reasonable man is a judicial construct—or shorthand—through which the judges seek to 
determine what was reasonable conduct in the circumstances of the particular case: the reasonable man is the 
personification of the judicial view of reasonableness. This does not mean, however, that the reasonable man 
is simply the personification of the judges themselves, or a decoy behind which they can and do pursue their 
own preferences and prejudices.8 Not least because there is a whole series of rules, developed through the case 
law, setting out the qualities and conduct—the ‘standard of care’—expected of the defendant. It is to these 
that we now turn.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-8-2>.
8.3  An objective standard
The first thing to note is that the standard of ‘what the reasonable man would do in the circumstances of the 
case’ is objective. This means that the standard of care expected of the defendant is not dependent on, or 
skewed in favour of, certain characteristics and/or capabilities of the defendant; the personal idiosyncrasies of 
the defendant are largely (although, as we shall see, not completely) irrelevant (Glasgow Corporation v Muir 
[1943] at 457). Put simply (except for in a very few, limited, circumstances) the appropriate question is not 
‘what could this particular defendant have done?’ but rather ‘what level of care and skill did the activity the 
defendant was undertaking require?’ What this means is that even though certain individuals may, due to 
certain inherent characteristics (e.g. experience and so on), be more or less able to take care the law imposes 
the same standard of care on everyone.9 The defendant cannot (usually) argue against, or raise as a defence in 
7
p. 216
8
9
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 6 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
response to, the imposition of liability on the grounds that they ‘did their best’ according to their education, 
experience, health and so on where their best falls below the standard of care expected of the reasonable man. 
This is clearly seen in the case of Nettleship v Weston [1971].
Nettleship v Weston [1971] 2 QB 691 (CA)
Mrs Weston, the defendant, was learning to drive. The claimant had agreed to give her driving 
lessons. Mrs Weston was holding the steering wheel and controlling the pedals, while the claimant 
moved the gear lever and handbrake. Unfortunately, after turning a corner, the defendant failed to 
straighten the steering wheel and panicked. Despite her best efforts, and the fact that the car was only 
travelling at walking pace, the car mounted the pavement and hit a lamp post, breaking the claimant’s 
knee cap. The defendant was convicted of driving without due care and attention.10 The claimant sued 
in negligence.
The majority of the Court of Appeal held that all drivers, including those learning to drive, are held to 
the same standard: ‘The standard of care … is measured objectively by the care to be 
↵
expected of 
an experienced, skilled and careful driver’ (at 702). The standard of care in negligence is not 
dependent on the particular defendant’s characteristics and/or capacities. The fact that, as a learner, 
she was by definition incapable of meeting this standard was irrelevant: ‘The learner driver may be 
doing his best, but his incompetent best is not good enough. He must drive in as good a manner as a 
driver of skill, experience and care’ (at 699). Nevertheless, the claimant’s damages were reduced by 50 
per cent for contributory negligence as he was jointly controlling the car at the time of the accident.11
The decision of the Court of Appeal in Nettleship is perhaps a little harsh. As a learner driver Mrs Weston was 
unable to reach the standard of care to which she was ultimately held. Moreover, the claimant was well aware 
of the defendant’s limited driving capabilities—he was in the car because he had agreed to give her driving 
lessons. As Salmon LJ, in dissent, noted, a learner driver cannot owe an instructor a duty to drive with a 
degree of skill they both know is not possessed (at 705). However, in taking the opposite view and holding the 
defendant to an objective standard, the majority sought to avoid the ‘endless confusion and injustice’ that 
would follow should the standard of care be varied according to someone’s knowledge of another’s skill (at 
700). By applying the same standard to all drivers, the decision in Nettleship ensures that victims of road 
accidents do not lose out simply because they were unlucky enough to be injured by someone who is learning 
to drive. The alternative is that the innocent victim of a learner driver who had driven as well as could be 
expected (albeit to a standard somewhat lower than that expected of an experienced driver) would be denied 
compensation.
10
p. 217
11
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 7 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Counterpoint
The ‘objective standard of care can be understood as the law’s attempt to strike a fair balance between 
the competing interests in freedom of action and personal security that we all share’.12 But does the 
decision in Nettleship strike a ‘fair balance’ between the parties? Is it fair?
The reason we make liability in negligence conditional upon the defendant having failed to exercise 
reasonable care (rather than, for instance, making liability strict) is the belief that it is only where the 
defendant is at fault (and that fault causes the claimant’s injuries) that the law should require the 
defendant to pay compensation. Corrective justice does not require that we compensate all the harms 
we cause, only those that we cause through our fault or neglect. The problem with the decision in 
Nettleship is that it imposes liability without genuine fault.13
The decision in Nettleship is perhaps better understood as resting on a more pragmatic motivating 
factor—compulsory motor insurance. The majority judges ‘see to it’ that the defendant is 
↵
liable so that the claimant can be compensated out of the insurance fund (at 700). In so doing, 
the Court of Appeal elevates the function of tort as a mechanism of compensation over that of 
achieving corrective justice, something that Lord Denning MR clearly recognises:
Thus we are, in this branch of the law, moving away from the concept: ‘No liability without 
fault’. We are beginning to apply the test: ‘On whom should the risk fall?’ Morally the learner 
driver is not at fault; but legally she is liable to be because she is insured and the risk should 
fall on her. (at 700)
Ultimately, of course, the financial loss falls neither on the claimant nor the defendant but on the 
defendant’s insurance company (and in turn other insurance policy holders). It is more accurate 
therefore to suggest that in Nettleship the fault principle is subordinated not only to ensure the 
claimant is compensated but also to the loss-shifting goals of distributive justice.
Despite appearances (underlined by Nettleship), the objective standard of care is not a standard of perfection. 
Take, by way of example, Birch v Paulson [2012] in which a driver was not liable for the serious injuries 
suffered by a drunk pedestrian who stepped out in front of her car. The Court of Appeal held that:
[while] it would have been very easy indeed for the defendant, as she approached this man on the 
kerb, either to have taken her foot off the accelerator or to have steered towards the centre of the 
road or both … the legal test is not a question … of perfection using hindsight. Of course it is not, and 
drivers are not required to give absolute guarantees of safety towards pedestrians. The yardstick is 
by reference to reasonable care … there was nothing here to require the defendant as a reasonably 
careful driver to act in any way other than a way in which she did act given the situation in which 
she found herself at the time. (at [32])14
12
13
p. 218
14
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 8 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The willingness of the court to apply an objective standard of care, independent of the characteristics and 
capacities of the defendant, was taken to an extreme in Roberts v Ramsbottom [1980]. In this case, the 
defendant had (unknowingly) suffered a cerebral haemorrhage before starting to drive into town. Though he 
realised his consciousness was impaired, he was unaware that he was unfit to drive. As he was driving along, 
he suddenly began to feel much worse. He subsequently collided with a stationary van, narrowly avoided two 
men working in the road and knocked a cyclist onto the pavement, before ploughing into the claimant’s car, 
seriously injuring the claimant and damaging the car. The defendant argued that from the moment of his 
stroke he was unable, through no fault of his own, to control his car properly or appreciate that he was unfit 
to drive. Neill J disagreed. Though the defendant was in no way to blame morally, he was nonetheless liable in 
the tort of negligence. He had fallen below the objective standard of the reasonable driver in relation to both 
in his collision with the claimant and also in continuing to drive despite feeling increasingly unwell and 
following his earlier collision with the parked van, even though he was, at the time, unable to 
↵
appreciate their significance. It was acknowledged that if he had suffered a complete loss of 
consciousness he might have had a defence of ‘automatism’.
In Nettleship and Roberts v Ramsbottom liability in negligence was imposed even though the defendant was 
not (or may not have been) genuinely at fault. However, the relevance of fault was reasserted in another 
dangerous driving case a few years later, Mansfield v Weetabix Ltd [1998], where the Court of Appeal held that 
the defendant was not liable for the damage caused to a shop (and shop owner’s home) when the lorry he was 
driving crashed into it. Unknown to the defendant, he had a medical condition (malignant insulinoma) which 
starved his brain of glucose so that it was unable to function properly. The final accident, which formed the 
basis of the claim, was the culmination of a gradual lowering of his blood sugar level. However, crucially, the 
court held that at no time had the defendant been aware of his condition, despite the fact that over the course 
of 40 miles he had been involved in three distinct incidents, one of which involved the police. Leggatt LJ 
distinguished Nettleship on the ground that that case did not deal with the situation where the defendant was 
unaware of his disability (the learner driver knew that she was learning to drive) (at 1267) and Roberts v 
Ramsbottom on the basis that the defendant had ‘continued to drive when he was unfit to do so and when he 
should have been aware of his unfitness’ (at 1266–7). The defendant had not, therefore, fallen below (ie 
breached) the standard of care—that is of ‘a reasonably competent driver unaware that he is, or may be, 
suffering from a condition that impairs his ability to drive’ (at 1268). Leggatt LJ continued: ‘To apply an 
objective standard in a way that did not take account of … [the defendant’s] condition would be to impose 
strict liability … that is not the law’ (at 1268).
Pause for reflection
It sometimes seems that recovery in tort can simply be a matter of luck.15 As Sarah Green and Jodi 
Garner point out, in both Roberts v Ramsbottom and Mansfield v Weetabix the claimant was injured by a 
driver whose ability to drive had been impaired by a medical condition. However, the specific nature 
of their conditions meant that while one claimant was successful, the other was not.16 Moreover, the 
p. 219
15
16
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 9 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
practical result, as acknowledged by Leggatt LJ, of Mansfield v Weetabix is that the claimants whose 
shop and home had been destroyed were left uncompensated and the defendant’s pot of insurance 
money remained untouched:
the plaintiffs may well have been insured [e.g. household or business insurance]. Others in 
their position may be less fortunate. A change in the law is, however, a matter for Parliament. 
Meanwhile, since in my judgment … [the defendant] was in no way to blame, he was not 
negligent. (at 1268)
Though they were aware of the harshness of the decision to the claimants, the Court of Appeal judges 
in Mansfield v Weetabix, unlike those in Nettleship, were unwilling to find the innocent lorry driver 
liable simply in order to compensate the claimants—who, after all, had (or should have had) their 
own household insurance. Responsibility for any change in the law, they argued, lay at the feet of 
Parliament (at 1268). Which approach do you prefer? Why? Think again about the arguments made 
earlier in relation to Nettleship.
↵
As Mansfield v Weetabix demonstrates the court have, on occasions, been willing to modify or vary the 
objective standard in relation to some illness:
Corr [v IBC Vehicles Ltd], Mansfield v Weetabix … Roberts [v Ramsbottom] recognise that whether 
induced by severe acute and engaged symptoms of mental illness or an hypoglycaemic state, 
coronary thrombosis, or other physically irresistible impulse, on rare occasions evidence will show 
the alleged tortfeasor not in any meaningful sense the agent for the damage since autonomy and 
ability to reason and act was wholly eliminated. (Rafferty LJ, Dunnage v Randall at [19])
An example where this was not the case is Dunnage v Randall [2015]. The claimant, an undiagnosed paranoid 
schizophrenic, set himself on fire, injuring his nephew (who was attempting to prevent the accident). He was 
found to have fallen below the standard of care of a reasonable man. Rejecting the application of Mansfield v 
Weetabix, the Court of Appeal held that:
unless a defendant can establish that his condition entirely eliminates responsibility … he remains 
vulnerable to liability if he does not meet the objective standard of care. It is the entirety of the 
elimination which drives this conclusion, and once that entirety is eroded or diminished, he is fixed 
with the standard. The evidence was that [the claimant’s] responsibility came very close to complete 
elimination, but the experts stopped short of finding that it was complete. (Rafferty LJ at [114])17
Other occasions where the courts have been willing to modify or vary the objective standard to take into 
account certain characteristics of some defendants are where the defendant is a child or are professionals, 
professing to have a special skill or competence.
p. 220
17
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 10 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
8.3.1  Children
It is accepted that the capacity of children to recognise the dangers of a particular activity, take care to avoid 
them and not hurt others varies according to the age of the child (unlike in criminal law there is no minimum 
age for liability in tort). In cases involving children, the standard of care applied is scaled according to age so 
that it becomes that which can be ‘objectively expected of a child of that age’ (Orchard v Lee [2009] at [9]). 
The question for the court is, in the words of Salmon LJ, ‘whether any ordinary child of 13½ [for example] can 
be expected to have done any more than this child did. I say “any ordinary child”. I do not mean a paragon of 
prudence; nor do I mean a scatter-brained child; but the ordinary girl of 13½’ (Gough v Thorne [1966] at 1387).
Orchard v Lee [2009] EWCA Civ 295 (CA)
Two 13-year-old boys were playing a game of tag in a courtyard and walkway designated for their 
year group during their school lunch break. During the course of the game the defendant was running 
backwards, taunting the other boy. Unfortunately he ran into the claimant, who was working as a 
lunchtime assistant supervisor at the school. The back of his head hit her cheek and, though the 
injury initially seemed insignificant, it later became quite serious. The trial judge dismissed 
↵
the supervisor’s claim finding that ‘it was a simple accident caused by “horseplay between two 
13-year-old boys in and around an outside court yard … boys doing what boys do”’ (at [2]).
The Court of Appeal agreed. A child will only be held liable in negligence if their conduct is careless to 
a very high degree or falls significantly outside the norm for a child of their age. In assessing whether 
this is the case, ‘the question is whether a reasonable 13-year-old boy, in the situation that [the 
defendant] was in, would have anticipated that some significant personal injury would result from his 
actions’ (Aikens LJ at [24]). As there was nothing to suggest that the defendant was playing tag ‘in a 
manner in which a 13-year-old boy would reasonably foresee there was likely to be injury beyond 
that normally occurring while a game of tag was in progress’, the defendant had not fallen below the 
standard of care required of him (Waller LJ at [12]).
Pause for reflection
As noted in the Australian case of McHale v Watson (1966), ‘Children, like everyone else, must accept 
as they go about in society the risks from which ordinary care on the part of others will not suffice to 
save them. One such risk is that boys of 12 may behave as boys of 12’ (at 216). Or, indeed, that 15-year- 
old schoolgirls will ‘play as somewhat irresponsible girls of 15’ (Mullin v Richards [1998] at 1312).
The ‘reasonable child’ standard invoked by the court effectively prevents a child-defendant’s action 
being measured against a standard of care that they are unable to reach. How—if at all—can this be 
reconciled with the Court of Appeal’s decision in Nettleship?
p. 221
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 11 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
8.3.2  Professionals
Another area where the courts modify or vary the objective standard is where a person professes to have a 
special skill or competence. The law requires that when dealing with people in the context of a calling or 
profession they do so with an appropriate level of competence.
Nobody expects the passenger on the Clapham omnibus to have any skill as a surgeon, a lawyer, a 
pilot, or a plumber, unless he is one; but if he professes to be one, then the law requires him to show 
such a skill as any ordinary member of the profession or calling to which he belongs, or claims to 
belong, would display.18
In Phillips v William Whiteley [1938], for example, the court denied a claim for damages in respect of an 
infection the claimant developed after having her ears pierced in a jewellery store. Ear-piercing is not 
something which requires a surgical level of skill and so the claimant could expect only that her ears were 
pierced to the standard of a reasonably competent jeweller, which they had been in this case.19 In contrast, in 
Wright v 
↵
Troy Lucas (a firm) and George Rusz [2019], Eady J held an unqualified legal advisor to the 
standards of a professional lawyer:
I have no hesitation in finding that the defendants should be held to the duty and standard of care 
that they had chosen to assume when holding themselves out as competent to carry out legal 
services for the claimant in his clinical negligence litigation. (at [82])
Though the defendant had never described himself as a solicitor, he had held himself out as having ‘extensive 
experience’ of these types of claims and as being ‘as good as, if not better, than any solicitor or barrister’ (at 
[18]). He was ordered to pay over £260,000 in damages to compensate the claimant for what they were likely 
to have received had their original claim against the NHS been properly handled (on the advice of the 
defendant, the claimant had previously settled for £20,000 and incurred £73,000 in legal costs).
8.3.2.1  The Bolam test
Typically, a defendant cannot escape liability in negligence simply by arguing that they followed common 
practice: ‘Neglect of duty does not cease by repetition to be neglect of duty’ (Bank of Montreal v Dominion 
Gresham Guarantee and Casualty Company [1930] at 666). However, there is one important exception to this 
rule. The courts give wide latitude to professionals, acting in their professional capacity, to determine the 
standards by which they are to be judged. In cases where the defendant has a special skill or competence (i.e. 
a skill that the reasonable man ordinarily does not have) and the circumstances are such that they are 
required to exercise that skill or competence, the courts have developed a different approach. In such cases, 
the actions of the defendant are judged against those of the ordinary skilled man professing to exercise that 
skill—the so-called Bolam test.
18
19
p. 222
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 12 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957] 1 WLR 582 
(QBD)
The claimant was a patient who had been given electro-convulsive therapy without being given a 
relaxant drug and without the appropriate physical restraints. In the course of the treatment, he 
fractured his hip, a possible consequence of the treatment about which he had not been warned. At 
the time, the medical profession held conflicting views on whether it was necessary to administer 
relaxant drugs before the procedure as a way of reducing the likelihood of injury and whether it was 
necessary to warn the patient of the risk of injury. In assessing the standard of care, the court held:
a man need not possess the highest expert skill … it is sufficient if he exercises the ordinary 
skill of an ordinary competent man exercising that particular art … he is not guilty of 
negligence if he has acted in accordance with a practice accepted as proper by a responsible 
body of medical men skilled in this particular art … Putting it the other way around, a man is 
not negligent, if he is acting in accordance with such a practice, merely because there is a 
body of opinion that would take a contrary view. (McNair J at 586–7)
As such, the defendant was not in breach of his duty, as other responsible doctors would have acted in 
the same way.
↵
Bolam applies to all professionals exercising a special skill or competence. In Moy v Pettman Smith 
[2005], a case involving a claim in negligence against a barrister, Baroness Hale approved Lord Hobhouse’s 
view in Arthur JS Hall & Co v Simons [2002] that:
the standard of care to be applied in negligence actions against an advocate is the same as that 
applicable to any other skilled professional who has to work in an environment where decisions and 
exercises of judgment have to be made in often difficult and time-constrained circumstances. It 
requires a [claimant] to show that the error was one which no reasonably competent member of the 
relevant profession would have made. (at [25])
However, a distinction is drawn between the defendant’s own ‘rank or status’ and that of the ‘post’ they are 
occupying at the time of the alleged breach (Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1987] (CA) at 751). The 
defendant’s conduct is assessed according to the standard reasonably expected of a reasonably competent 
person occupying such a post. The law makes no allowances for inexperience or for the fact that everyone 
must, to a certain extent, gain practical experience ‘on the job’. Thus in Wilsher a junior doctor was held to the 
standards of the more senior post they were occupying at the time, notwithstanding the fact that this was 
effectively part of their training: ‘the standard is not just that of the averagely competent and well-informed 
junior houseman (or whatever the position of the doctor) but of such a person who fills a post in a unit 
offering a highly specialised service’ (Mustill LJ at 751).20 Wilsher was applied in FB (Suing by her Mother and 
p. 223
20
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 13 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Litigation Friend, WAC) v Princess Alexandra Hospital NHS Trust [2017]. The defendant, a Senior House Officer 
(SHO), was found to have fallen below the standard of care of a reasonably competent SHO in her treatment of 
a young child:
Dr Rushd [the defendant] in the present case must be judged by the standard of a reasonably 
competent SHO in an accident and emergency department. The fact that Dr Rushd was aged 25 and 
‘relatively inexperienced’ … does not diminish the required standard of skill and care. On the other 
hand, the fact that she had spent six months in a paediatric department does not elevate the required 
standard. Other SHOs in A&E departments will have different backgrounds and experience, but they 
are all judged by the same standard … Thus in professional negligence, as in the general law of 
negligence, the standard of care which the law requires is an imperfect compromise. It achieves a 
balance between the interests of society and fairness to the individual practitioner. (at [63], [60])
Counterpoint
In practice, the Bolam test means that the courts generally defer to the standards of a particular 
profession as to what is considered appropriate behaviour. This is important. As Margaret Brazier and 
José Miola have argued, ‘judges are not qualified to make professional judgements on the practices of 
other learned professions … A professional should not be penalised, and held to be incompetent, just 
because a judge fancies “playing” at being architect, solicitor or doctor’.21
↵
A balance needs to be struck between respect for expert opinions and showing them undue 
deference.22 It is argued that the courts have been reluctant to impose liability on members of the 
medical profession. Traditional justifications for this include: the importance of the doctor’s 
reputation as a member of a respectable and responsible profession, a reluctance to interfere in a 
specialised branch of knowledge, the view that doctors are motivated by altruistic reasons and that it 
would therefore be unfair to penalise them for every error and, finally, a fear of increased claims and 
defensive medical practices.23
In her exploration of the gendered dimensions of the Bolam principle and its conflation of accepted 
with acceptable practice, Sally Sheldon suggests a number of alternative justifications pointing in the 
opposite direction, that is for imposing liability. These include the need to compensate the victims of 
medical misadventures, the potential of negligence claims to discourage bad practice and reinforce 
the accountability of doctors (especially given their high status and remuneration), the current failure 
to recognise the vulnerability of the patient in the doctor/patient relationship and, crucially, the 
existence of liability insurance.24
Which of these views do you find the most persuasive?
21
p. 224
22
23
24
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 14 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
While Bolam established that a doctor will not have fallen below the standard of care expected of a reasonable 
doctor, if they have acted in accordance with a respectable body of the medical profession (even if it is a 
minority viewpoint), it was qualified by a ‘gloss’ applied by the House of Lords in Bolitho v City and Hackney 
Health Authority [1998]. In this case, a young boy suffered brain damage and later died of a cardiac arrest 
following respiratory failure while in hospital. Two serious incidents of respiratory difficulties had preceded 
his death, during which nurses had called for the doctor, who never arrived. As a result, the young boy had 
not been intubated (which the claimant argued would have prevented his death). The doctor argued that, 
even if she had attended, she would not have intubated the young boy and that, as a result, her failure to 
attend had not caused his death. Ultimately, though the majority of witnesses agreed that the boy should 
have been intubated, the House of Lords was persuaded that—as a reasonable body of opinion would have 
acted as the defendant did—she had not fallen below the standard of care required of her. However, the court 
went on to stress that the common practices of a profession should not go completely unchecked:
In the vast majority of cases the fact that distinguished experts in the field are of a particular opinion 
will demonstrate the reasonableness of that opinion … But if, in a rare case, it can be demonstrated 
that the professional opinion is not capable of withstanding logical analysis, the judge is entitled to 
hold that the body of opinion is not reasonable or responsible. (Lord Browne-Wilkinson at 243)
↵
The upshot of Bolitho is that ‘doctor knows best’ only ‘if he [sic] acts reasonably and logically and gets 
his facts right’.25 If a particular practice, even if widely accepted within a profession, is logically 
insupportable, a defendant cannot escape liability simply by showing that others would have acted as they 
did.26 What this means is that the Bolam test is now better understood, to use Rachael Mulheron’s 
formulation, as a two-stage test:
Has the doctor acted in accordance with a practice accepted as proper by a respectable body of medical 
opinion?
If yes, is the practice itself ‘reasonable’ and ‘logical’?27
However, crucially, Mulheron notes, the courts have not added a third stage in which they choose between 
two reasonable and logical schools of thought:
[I]t is not for the court to venture into a consideration of two contrary bodies of opinion and to 
decide the case on the basis of which, of the patient’s and the doctor’s expert medical opinion, it 
prefers … Once Bolam applies, the fact of differences in expert opinion cannot lead to a rejection of 
Bolam evidence.28
The assumption that ‘doctors know best’ (albeit qualified by the Bolitho gloss) has been especially 
controversial in relation to warning patients of the risks of treatment and the treatment of medically 
incapacitated adults and mature minors.29 The former now appears to have been resolved following the 
recent case of Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board [2015] in which the Supreme Court rejected the 
application of the Bolam test in cases involving the disclosure of risks in a medical context.
p. 225
25
26
27
28
29
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 15 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Until Montgomery, the leading case on the duty of doctors to inform their patients of the risks of their 
treatment was the 30-year-old decision in Sidaway v Bethlem Royal Hospital [1985]. In Sidaway, the claimant 
had been paralysed while undergoing an operation on her back. There was no evidence that the operation had 
been performed negligently. However, the claimant argued that she should have been told of the known 
(albeit very small) risk of paralysis accompanying the procedure and that, had she been told, she would not 
have had the operation. The majority of the House of Lords, applying Bolam, held that the doctor had not 
breached his duty of care in failing to inform her of the risks associated with her treatment as other 
reasonable doctors would have acted in the same way. There was one caveat however. In cases where the risk 
of ‘grave adverse consequences’ was ‘substantial’—the assessment of which was to be left to the doctor—‘in 
the absence of some cogent clinical reason why the patient should not be informed, a doctor, recognising and 
respecting his patient’s right of decision, could hardly fail to appreciate the necessity for an appropriate 
warning’ (Lord Bridge, Sidaway at 24).
↵
The majority view has been the subject of extensive and scathing criticism, much of which has focused 
on Lord Scarman’s dissenting opinion, in which he argued that the courts ‘cannot stand idly by if the 
profession, by an excess of paternalism, denies its patients real choice. In a word, the law will not allow the 
medical profession to play God’ (at 1028). Indeed, as Lords Reed and Kerr noted in Montgomery, it would be 
‘wrong to regard Sidaway as an unqualified endorsement of the application of the Bolam test to the giving of 
advice about treatment’ (at [57]). Over the years, the unsatisfactory nature of the majority’s analysis in 
Sidaway has meant that the courts in England and Wales have tacitly departed from it (in favour of Lord 
Woolf MR’s test in Pearce v United Bristol Healthcare NHS Trust [1999]): a position that ‘was effectively 
endorsed, particularly by Lord Steyn, in the causation case Chester v Afshar [2005]’30 and was unequivocally 
confirmed in Montgomery.
Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board [2015] UKSC 11 (SC)
In 1999, the claimant gave birth to a baby boy. As a result of complications during the birth, during 
which the baby was starved of oxygen, the baby was born with significant disabilities. The claimant 
sued in negligence (on behalf of her son). The claimant was a relatively small woman and diabetic. 
Women with diabetes are more likely to have large babies and there is a 9–10 per cent risk of shoulder 
dystocia during vaginal delivery (the baby’s shoulders being too wide to pass through the mother’s 
pelvis). The claimant was told that she was having a larger than usual baby; however she was not told 
about the risks of her experiencing mechanical problems during labour. Her doctor accepted that 
there was a high risk of shoulder dystocia, but despite this, she said that her practice was not to spend 
a lot of time, or indeed any time at all, on it ‘because, in her estimation, the risk of a grave problem for 
the baby resulting from shoulder dystocia was very small … and that if the condition was mentioned, 
“most women will actually say, ‘I’d rather have a caesarean section’ … and it’s not in the maternal 
interests for women to have caesarean sections”’ (at [13]).
p. 226
30
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 16 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The primary question for the court was whether, in failing to warn the claimant of the risk, the doctor 
was in breach of her duty of care towards the claimant. (The lower courts had found the doctor’s 
actions to accord with a responsible body of medical opinion (as required by Bolam) and— 
surprisingly—not to fall within the small group of cases involving ‘a substantial risk of grave adverse 
consequences’ where the court may substitute its own view.)
The Supreme Court unanimously found in favour of the claimant. It held that patients have a right to 
make their own decisions and to be given sufficient information to do so. Doctors, therefore, have a 
corresponding duty to take reasonable care to ensure that a patient is aware of material risks inherent 
in treatment, and of any alternatives:
Since Sidaway, however, it has become increasingly clear that the paradigm of the doctor– 
patient relationship implicit in the speeches in that case has ceased to reflect the 
↵
reality and complexity of the way in which healthcare services are provided, or the way 
in which the providers and recipients of such services view their relationship … patients are 
now widely regarded as persons holding rights, rather than as the passive recipients of the 
care of the medical profession … In the law of negligence, this approach entails a duty on the 
part of doctors to take reasonable care to ensure that a patient is aware of material risks of 
injury that are inherent in treatment …
An adult person of sound mind is entitled to decide which, if any, of the available forms of 
treatment to undergo, and her consent must be obtained before treatment interfering with 
her bodily integrity is undertaken. The doctor is therefore under a duty to take reasonable 
care to ensure that the patient is aware of any material risks involved in any recommended 
treatment, and of any reasonable alternative or variant treatments. The test of materiality is 
whether, in the circumstances of the particular case, a reasonable person in the patient’s 
position would be likely to attach significance to the risk, or the doctor is or should 
reasonably be aware that the particular patient would be likely to attach significance to it. 
(Lords Reed and Kerr at [75], [82], [87])
The Justices made clear that significance of a risk is fact-sensitive and cannot be reduced to 
percentages, and that (in line with guidance issued by the General Medical Council) in order to advise, 
the doctor must engage in dialogue with her patient (at [89]).
There is one important caveat (as well as the expected exceptions related to emergency treatment) to 
the doctor’s duty to inform in the form of a ‘therapeutic exception’. This allows a doctor to withhold 
information where ‘he reasonably considers that its disclosure would be seriously detrimental to the 
patient’s health’ (at [88]). The court anticipates that use of this caveat will be limited: ‘it is not 
intended to subvert that principle by enabling the doctor to prevent the patient from making an 
informed choice where she is liable to make a choice which the doctor considers to be contrary to her 
best interests’ (at [91]).
p. 227
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 17 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
A secondary question for the court related to causation. The lower courts held that the claimant had 
not established on the facts that she would have elected to have a caesarean section, had she been 
properly informed. Given the evidence of the doctor herself that ‘if you were to mention shoulder 
dystocia to every [diabetic] patient, if you were to mention to any mother who faces labour that there 
is a very small risk of the baby dying in labour, then everyone would ask for a caesarean section’, and 
the claimant’s own statements, it is unsurprising that the Supreme Court concluded that the claimant 
would have chosen a caesarean section had it been offered to her.31
Pause for reflection
Montgomery is also—particularly in Lady Hale’s ‘footnote’ to the main judgment—a timely and 
important recognition of patient—and in particular women’s—autonomy. It offers a ‘robust’ defence 
of women’s choice in the context of pregnancy and childbirth.32
… it is not possible to consider a particular medical procedure in isolation from its 
alternatives. Most decisions about medical care are not simple yes/no answers. There are 
choices to be made, arguments for and against each of the options to be considered, and 
sufficient information must be given so that this can be done … Pregnancy is a particularly 
powerful illustration [of this] … That is not necessarily to say that the doctors have to 
volunteer the pros and cons of each option in every case, but they clearly should do so in any 
case where either the mother or the child is at heightened risk from a vaginal delivery. In 
this day and age, we are not only concerned about risks to the baby. We are equally, if not 
more, concerned about risks to the mother. And those include the risks associated with 
giving birth, as well as any after-effects. One of the problems in this case was that for too 
long the focus was on the risks to the baby, without also taking into account what the 
mother might face in the process of giving birth. (at [109]–[111])
Lady Hale continued,
31
p. 228
32
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 18 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
We do not have a full transcript of the evidence, but in the extracts we do have Dr McLellan 
[the defendant doctor] referred to explaining to a mother who requested a caesarean section 
‘why it may not be in the mother’s best interest’ and later expressed the view that ‘it’s not in 
the maternal interests for women to have caesarean sections’. Whatever Dr McLellan may 
have had in mind, this does not look like a purely medical judgment. It looks like a judgment 
that vaginal delivery is in some way morally preferable to a caesarean section: so much so 
that it justifies depriving the pregnant woman of the information needed for her to make a 
free choice in the matter. Giving birth vaginally is indeed a unique and wonderful experience, 
but it has not been suggested that it inevitably leads to a closer and better relationship 
between mother and child than does a caesarean section.
In any event, once the argument departs from purely medical considerations and involves 
value judgments of this sort, it becomes clear … that the Bolam test, of conduct supported by 
a responsible body of medical opinion, becomes quite inapposite. A patient is entitled to take 
into account her own values, her own assessment of the comparative merits of giving birth 
in the ‘natural’ and traditional way and of giving birth by caesarean section, whatever 
medical opinion may say, alongside the medical evaluation of the risks to herself and her 
baby. She may place great value on giving birth in the natural way and be prepared to take 
the risks to herself and her baby which this entails. The medical profession must respect her 
choice, unless she lacks the legal capacity to decide (St George’s Healthcare NHS Trust v S 
[1999]). There is no good reason why the same should not apply in reverse, if she is prepared 
to forgo the joys of natural childbirth in order to avoid some 
↵
not insignificant risks to 
herself or her baby. She cannot force her doctor to offer treatment which he or she considers 
futile or inappropriate. But she is at least entitled to the information which will enable her to 
take a proper part in that decision … Gone are the days when it was thought that, on 
becoming pregnant, a woman lost, not only her capacity, but also her right to act as a 
genuinely autonomous human being. (at [114]–[116])33
Lady Hale retired from the Supreme Court in January 2020. However, her comments in Montgomery 
are indicative of what we came to expect—and welcome—from the first woman Justice on the 
Supreme Court during her time on the court.34 Why do you think she decided to add a ‘footnote’ in 
this case? Do you think it is important that she did so?
p. 229
33
34
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 19 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Counterpoint
And yet, while Montgomery calls for the opening up of lines of communication between medical 
professionals and patients, as Kirsty Keywood notes, the effectiveness of the case in promoting and 
protecting patient choice is—at least in part—dependent on resources being available to support their 
choices.35 Could the decision in Montgomery itself work against this?
After all, one consequence of the decision in Montgomery is that a substantial sum of the Lanarkshire 
NHS Board’s budget has been taken out of the collective pot. Maternity claims already represent the 
highest value, and the second highest number, of all NHS claims (though these represent just 0.1 per 
cent of all births).36 However, while Lords Reed and Kerr acknowledged that the decision could lead to 
an increase in defensive practices, as well as in claims from women claiming that they had not been 
adequately advised, they did not expect this to be the case:
[A]n approach to the law which, instead of treating patients as placing themselves in the 
hands of their doctors (and then being prone to sue their doctors in the event of a 
disappointing outcome), treats them so far as possible as adults who are capable of 
understanding that medical treatment is uncertain of success and may involve risks, 
accepting responsibility for the taking of risks affecting their own lives, and living with the 
consequences of their choices … in so far as the law contributes to the incidence of litigation, 
an approach which results in patients being aware that the outcome of treatment is 
uncertain and potentially dangerous, and in their taking responsibility for the ultimate 
choice to undergo that treatment, may be less likely to encourage recriminations and 
litigation, in the event of an adverse outcome, than an approach which requires patients to 
rely on their doctors to determine whether a risk inherent in a particular form of treatment 
should be incurred. (at [81], [93])
Do you agree?37
↵
Without doubt Montgomery is a landmark decision.38 ‘“Informed consent” has arrived’ and is now 
‘firmly part of English law’ (Lady Hale at [107]).39 Doctors now have ‘a duty to take reasonable care to ensure 
that the patient is aware of any material risks involved in any recommended treatment, and of any reasonable 
alternative or variant treatments’ (at [87]). In Duce v Worcestershire Acute Hospitals NHS Trust [2018], Hamblen 
LJ suggested the assessment of the materiality of the risk involved a two-stage test (paragraph numbers refer 
to Montgomery):
35
36
37
p. 230
38
39
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 20 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
What risks associated with an operation were or should have been known to the medical 
professional in question. That is a matter falling within the expertise of medical 
professionals [83].
Whether the patient should have been told about such risks by reference to whether they 
were material. That is a matter for the Court to determine [83]. This issue is not therefore the 
subject of the Bolam test and not something that can be determined by reference to expert 
evidence alone [84]–[85]. (Duce at [33])
So when might a risk be ‘material’? And, more importantly, how does a doctor determine what is material to a 
specific patient? The test of materiality, as set out in Montgomery, is ‘whether, in the circumstances of the 
particular case, a reasonable person in the patient’s position would be likely to attach significance to the risk, 
or the doctor is or should reasonably be aware that the particular patient would be likely to attach significance 
to it’ (at [87]). The test is both subjective and objective. However, what is less clear is the extent to which 
subjective factors relating to the patient are relevant:
[T]he greater degree of subjectivity inserted into the assessment the further one departs from the 
standard of the reasonable patient. Some characteristics of a patient are obvious: In particular that 
person’s actual medical condition which would include its severity. Other personal factors may be 
less self-evident: such as the patient’s tolerance for or stoicism towards pain, or the ability to 
manage pain. Other factors might be quite remote from the medical or physiological condition of the 
patient, such as the patient’s need to return to work, or the fact that the patient has suffered a recent 
event in his/her life (such as a bereavement or a divorce) which renders that person unusually 
fragile and (say) unwilling to take chances at that particular time. (Green J, Thefaut v Johnston [2017] 
at [55])
The test was applied by the High Court in A v East Kent Hospitals University NHS Foundation Trust [2015] 
(which was heard just five days after the judgment in Montgomery). The claimant argued that the defendant 
had negligently failed to warn her that the foetus she was carrying might be suffering from a chromosomal 
abnormality. It was common ground that were the risk of such an abnormality found to be ‘material’ then it 
ought to have been raised with the claimant. Finding for the defendant, the judge held that while a risk 
‘somewhere in the region of 1–3 per cent’ would, in this context, be considered ‘material’ (and, as such, 
should be raised with the claimant), ‘the decision in Montgomery … is not authority for the proposition that 
medical practitioners need to warn about risks which are theoretical’ or ‘background’, as was the case here 
(Dingeman J at [90], [101]).40
↵
But what of the availability of ‘any reasonable alternative or variant treatments’. Lords Kerr and Reed 
left open the question as to when an alternative treatment would be considered ‘reasonable’ and, as such, 
raised with the patient. This was addressed by the Supreme Court in McCulloch v Forth Valley Health Board 
[2023].
40
p. 231
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 21 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
McCulloch v Forth Valley Health Board [2023] UKSC 26 (SC)
Mr McCulloch was admitted to hospital with severe chest pains. He was diagnosed with pericarditis 
(inflammation of the sac surrounding the heart). Following treatment, his condition improved and he 
was discharged from hospital. Two days later, he was readmitted complaining of chest pain. He was 
seen by a consultant who discussed with him the possibility of pericardiocentesis (a procedure to 
drain the fluid) but, as his condition appeared to be improving, she did not think this was necessary at 
the time. The consultant did not, however, discuss her decision not to prescribe Mr McCulloch non- 
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as an alternative to the procedure. A few days later, he 
was discharged from hospital. Sadly, Mr McCulloch died the next day following a cardiac arrest. The 
claimant (Mr McCulloch’s widow who was bringing the claim along with other relatives) argued that 
Mr McCulloch ought to have been prescribed NSAIDs and that had the consultant done so, Mr 
McCulloch would have taken them and, on the balance of probabilities, would not have suffered a 
cardiac arrest.
The question for the court was ‘what legal test should be applied to the assessment as to whether an 
alternative treatment is reasonable and requires to be discussed with the patient’ (at [3]). And, more 
specifically,
did the doctor in this case fall below the required standard of reasonable care by failing to 
make a patient aware of an alternative treatment in a situation where the doctor’s opinion 
was that the alternative treatment was not reasonable and that opinion was supported by a 
responsible body of medical opinion? (at [3])
Finding for the defendant, the court held that ‘the correct legal test to be applied to the question of 
what constitutes a reasonable alternative treatment is the professional practice test found in … 
Bolam’ (at [56]). Lords Hamblen and Burrows continued:
On the facts of this case, therefore, as Dr Labinjoh [the consultant] took the view that 
prescribing NSAIDs was not a reasonable alternative treatment because … [Mr McCulloch] 
had no relevant pain and there was no clear diagnosis of pericarditis and, because that view 
was supported by a responsible body of medical opinion … there was no breach of the duty of 
care to inform required by Montgomery … [and] no basis for going behind [the] decision [of 
the lower courts who had] reached on the evidence that Dr Labinjoh was not negligent. (at 
[56])
They further stated that:
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 22 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
A hypothetical example may help to explain, in more detail, how we regard the law as 
working. A doctor will first seek to provide a diagnosis (which may initially be a provisional 
diagnosis) having, for example, examined the patient, conducted tests, and having had 
discussions with the patient. Let us then say that, in respect of that diagnosis, there are ten 
possible treatment options and that there is a responsible body of medical 
↵
opinion that 
would regard each of the ten as possible treatment options. Let us then say that the doctor, 
exercising his or her clinical judgment, and supported by a responsible body of medical 
opinion, decides that only four of them are reasonable. The doctor is not negligent by failing 
to inform the patient about the other six even though they are possible alternative 
treatments. The narrowing down from possible alternative treatments to reasonable 
alternative treatments is an exercise of clinical judgment to which the professional practice 
test should be applied. The duty of reasonable care would then require the doctor to inform 
the patient not only of the treatment option that the doctor is recommending but also of the 
other three reasonable alternative treatment options (plus no treatment if that is a 
reasonable alternative option) indicating their respective advantages and disadvantages and 
the material risks involved in such treatment options.
The identification of which treatments are reasonable alternatives (ie clinically appropriate) 
is as much a matter falling within medical expertise and professional judgment, and hence 
governed by the professional practice test, as the identification of risks associated with any 
treatment. Indeed, they are closely linked. The risk of any given treatment will be a 
significant part of any analysis of alternative treatment options. The identification of 
reasonable alternative treatments (ie clinically appropriate treatments) should therefore be 
treated in the same way as the identification of risk in Duce. It is only once the reasonable 
alternative treatment options have been identified that the second stage advisory role arises. 
That is, the doctor is required at the second stage to inform the patient of the reasonable 
alternative treatments and of the material risks of such alternative treatments. (at [57], [64])
Though welcomed by NHS Resolution for applying ‘sound common sense’,41 as Louise Austin has noted, the 
upshot of McCulloch is the creation of ‘two tests of disclosure dependent upon whether the information being 
disclosed relates to risks or alternative treatments’:
Montgomery is widely regarded as a landmark decision in informed consent because of its redefining 
of ‘materiality’ of risk away from the Bolam reasonable doctor standard in favour of an approach 
focused on what information the patient is likely to find significant. The courts have not adopted the 
same patient-oriented approach in the context of reasonable alternative treatments culminating in 
the Supreme Court’s decision to apply Bolam in McCulloch.42
p. 232
41
42
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 23 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Inevitably, perhaps, many legal arguments have been made, and much judicial and academic ink43 has been 
spilt since Montgomery as doctors, lawyers and their clients attempt to work 
↵
out its impact on clinical 
practice.44 What is clear is that Bolam is far from dead. It continues to inform both stages of the Montgomery 
test (see e.g. Grimstone v Epsom and St Helier University Hospitals NHS Trust [2015]; Bayley v George Eliot 
Hospital [2017]; Duce; Diamond v Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust [2019]; Brady v Southend 
University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust [2020]). Nor has Montgomery been confined to recent cases. In CNZ v 
Royal Bath Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust [2023], for example, it was applied in respect of obstetric care 
received by the claimant’s mother in 1996. Neither has it been confined to consent cases (as was originally 
thought). Its principles have been applied in cases where treatment in general is in question (see e.g. Webster 
v Burton Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust [2017]), to the duty to inform a patient of the need for follow-up 
treatment (Gallardo v Imperial College Healthcare Trust [2017]) and outside a medical context in O’Hare v 
Coutts & Co [2016] in which the defendant, a private bank, was found to owe a duty to take reasonable care to 
warn its customers of risks relating to suggested investments (although, on the facts, it had not breached 
that duty).
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-8-3>.
8.4  Setting the standard of care
Having determined that the courts generally apply a common standard, we now need to consider how the 
courts go about setting that standard. While the courts do not (usually) take into account the characteristics of 
the individual defendant, they do take into account the circumstances of the situation in which the accident 
or injury occurred. The standard of care does not exist in the abstract: ‘The law in all cases exacts a degree of 
care commensurate with the risk’ (Lord Macmillan, Read v Lyons Co Ltd [1947] at 173).
So, if we ask what is a reasonable speed to drive, the answer will vary—the reasonable car driver will drive at 
different speeds at different times and according to different circumstances.45 Some examples may help here. 
All things being equal, it is reasonable to drive at 70 mph on a clear motorway but not on residential streets. It 
will be reasonable to drive faster in clear weather conditions than when it is pouring with rain or foggy. Why 
is this? The answer is straightforward. The risks posed by driving at 70 mph in a residential street are higher 
than those on a clear motorway. Similarly, accidents are more likely to occur in adverse weather conditions. 
The reasonable driver may be expected to take more care when driving near a school, where potential injuries 
may not only be more likely (e.g. a child running out from behind a parked car) but more severe (a child is 
more likely to be more seriously injured than an adult if hit by a car) than if, say, they have an injured friend 
in the back of their car who they are rushing to hospital (where the social utility of their act may outweigh 
the risks it creates).
43
p. 233
44
45
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 24 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Thus, in Wooldridge v Sumner [1963], for example, a photographer who was injured while working at the 
National Horse Show was unable to recover for the serious injuries he suffered when one of the riders he was 
photographing had come round the corner of the arena 
↵
at excessive speed causing the horse to become 
temporarily out of control. Rejecting his claim, the Court of Appeal held that:
[t]he law of negligence has always recognised that the standard of care which a reasonable man will 
exercise depends upon the conditions under which the decision to avoid the act or omission relied 
upon as negligence has to be taken. (Diplock LJ at 67)
In the absence of recklessness or an intention to harm the claimant, the horse rider was free to concentrate 
on winning the competition.
When seeking to define the standard of care required of the defendant—that is, what the defendant ought to 
have done or what is reasonable in the circumstances of the case—the courts take a number of factors into 
account: probability or risk of the injury; the seriousness of the injury; the cost of taking precautions; and the 
social value of the activity:
the question of what amounts to ‘such care as is in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable’ 
depends upon assessing … not only the likelihood that someone may be injured and the seriousness 
of the injury which may occur, but also the social value of the activity which gives rise to the risk and 
the cost of preventative measure. These factors have to be balanced against each other. (Lord 
Hoffmann, Tomlinson v Congleton Borough Council [2003] at [34])
It is, in essence, a balancing act where no one factor is viewed in isolation from the others. In each case, the 
courts weigh up the likelihood of injury and the seriousness of harm against the cost of taking precautions 
and the social value of the activity before coming to a decision as to what was reasonable in all the 
circumstances of the case—that is, what the reasonable man would have done.
Pause for reflection
The process through which the courts distinguish between acceptable and unacceptable carelessness 
was reduced to a quasi-mathematical formula by a US judge named Learned Hand (in United States v 
Carroll Towing Co [1947]). The so-called ‘Learned Hand test’ holds that where the private and social 
costs46 of taking precautions (B) is less than the probability (P) multiplied by the likelihood of injury 
(L), the defendant will be held to have fallen below the standard of care of the reasonable person if 
they fail to take such precautions. Conversely, where the costs of taking precautions (B) are greater 
than the probability (P) multiplied by the seriousness of the injury (L) occurring, it would be 
unreasonable to expect the defendant to take such precautions.
p. 234
46
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 25 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Of course, in reality few, if any, social interactions can be reduced to this formula. And while the test 
remains a helpful illustration of the sort of balancing exercises the courts are undertaking when 
setting the appropriate standard of care in all the circumstances of the case, 
↵
its purpose is 
essentially economic: ‘If it can be shown that expenditure of £X on avoiding or minimising the risk of 
an accident will prevent accident costs of £X + Y, then it is clearly desirable that £X should be spent. 
On the other hand, it is said, there is no point in spending £X to prevent accident costs which are less 
than £X.’47 This reduction of value of life and limb to a mathematical formula is described by Joanne 
Conaghan and Wade Mansell as ‘ideologically objectionable in its shallow and impoverished view of 
human activity’.48 Do you agree? For a real-life example consider the US case of Grimshaw v Ford 
Motor Co [1981], discussed in section 12.2.1.1.
8.4.1  Probability that the injury will occur
One of the first factors the courts will take into account is likelihood of the injury occurring. The general rule 
is the more likely—or foreseeable—the outcome, the greater the possibility that the courts will find the 
defendants liable for failing to take steps to avoid it.
Bolton v Stone [1951] AC 850 (HL)
The claimant was hit on the head outside her house by a cricket ball hit by a player from an adjacent 
cricket pitch. The hit was substantial, although possibly not exceptional. The ball had travelled some 
100 yards (approx 91 m) and over a seven-foot fence (which, due to the slope of the pitch, was in 
effect 17 feet high). The claimant sued in negligence and nuisance.
The House of Lords, rejecting both claims,49 held that although there was evidence that over a period 
of years balls had been hit out of the ground, this was, in fact, very rare. It had happened six times in 
30 years. Thus, although the possibility of a ball being hit out of the ground was foreseeable, this was 
not sufficient to establish negligence since the chances of the ball hitting someone were so low that a 
reasonable person would not have taken precautions to stop it happening.
The standard of care in the law of negligence is the standard of an ordinarily careful man, but 
in my opinion an ordinarily careful man does not take precautions against every foreseeable 
risk … He takes precautions against risks which are reasonably likely to happen … there are 
many footpaths and highways adjacent to cricket grounds and golf courses on to which 
cricket and golf balls are occasionally driven, but such risks are habitually treated both by the 
owners and committees of such cricket and golf courses and by the pedestrians who use the 
adjacent footpaths and highways as negligible and it is not, in my opinion, actionable 
negligence not to take precautions to avoid such risks. (Lord Oaksey at 863)50
p. 235
47
48
49
50
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 26 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
↵
Thus, in Richards v London Borough of Bromley [2012], the Court of Appeal held that an injury suffered 
by a school pupil (who had injured her heel when leaving the school through a pair of swing doors) was not 
reasonably foreseeable. Though there had been one incident four months earlier, this was only superficially 
similar to the accident in question. Moreover,
[i]n any event the trivial nature of the earlier incident and the risk which it brought to light, seen in 
the context of thirty years’ safe use of the doors by thousands of children and staff, rendered 
reasonable both the nature of the remedial action which the school authorities proposed to take and 
the timescale within which they proposed to do it’. (at [14])
In Perry v Harris [2008], a child suffered severe and permanent injuries while using a bouncy castle at her 
friend’s birthday party. Finding for the defendant, the parents who had hired the bouncy castle, Lord Phillips 
CJ held that ‘the standard of care she was required to show was that which a reasonably careful parent would 
show for her own children’ (at [37]). In setting the standard of care, what mattered was not merely whether 
some harm was foreseeable but also the severity of the foreseeable harm:
A reasonable parent could foresee that if children indulged in boisterous behaviour on a bouncy 
castle, there would be a risk that, sooner or later, one child might collide with another and cause that 
child some physical injury of a type that can be an incident of some contact sports. We do not 
consider that it was reasonably foreseeable that such injury would be likely to be serious, let alone as 
severe as the injury sustained by the claimant. (Lord Phillips CJ at [38])
This was followed in the similar case of Cockbill v Riley [2013] in which the claimant fractured his spine 
resulting in incomplete tetraplegia after entering a paddling pool (it was not clear how he had done so) while 
at a party to celebrate the end of his GCSEs. The court held that it was not reasonably foreseeable that 
someone would attempt to carry out a dive or a belly-flop and thus suffer grave injury and so the defendant 
was not in breach of his duty of care to the claimant.
It is also clear from the cases that the conduct of the defendant is assessed at the time of the alleged breach. It 
is a test of foresight, not hindsight (Roe v Ministry of Health [1954]). If something seems to be acceptable at 
the time—that is, if the risk of injury is low—then it is unlikely to be considered negligent.
Roe v Ministry of Health [1954] 2 QB 66 (CA)
The claimants were paralysed after being injected with contaminated nupercaine (a spinal 
anaesthetic) during a routine, minor operation. The nupercaine had been contained in sealed glass 
ampoules and stored in a solution of phenol prior to use. Unknown to the hospital, the phenol had 
percolated into the ampoules through invisible cracks or molecular flaws, causing the claimants’ 
paralysis.
p. 236
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 27 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Rejecting the claims, the Court of Appeal held that, though it was clear in hindsight that the hospital 
was at fault, at the time of the operation neither the anaesthetist nor any of the hospital staff knew of 
the dangers of storing glass ampoules in the phenol solution. The test applied was the standard of 
medical knowledge when the accident occurred in 1947: ‘We must not look at the 1947 accident with 
1954 spectacles’ (Denning LJ at 84).
↵
The approach in Roe was affirmed in Williams v University of Birmingham [2011]. The widow of a former 
physics undergraduate, who had conducted experiments in an asbestos-lagged service tunnel under the 
science department at the University of Birmingham and who had since died of malignant mesothelioma in 
his left lung, brought a claim against the university in negligence. The university admitted that the 
claimant’s husband would have been exposed to asbestos as a student, but argued that the exposure was too 
small to ground a claim. Rejecting the claim, Atkins LJ (giving the leading judgment) adapted Denning LJ’s 
‘graphic phrase’, to argue that ‘we must not look at what happened in the tunnel in 1974 through 2009 or 
2011 spectacles’ (at [38]). The state of the lagging was not such as should have alerted the university to a 
reasonably foreseeable risk that people using the tunnel might be exposed to an unacceptable risk of an 
asbestos-related injury (at [60]–[61]).
Pause for reflection
A leading medical textbook published in 1951 (after the accident which formed the basis of the claim 
in Roe) warns medical practitioners to ‘never place ampoules of local anaesthetic solution in alcohol 
or spirit. This common practice is probably responsible for some cases of permanent paralysis 
reported after spinal analgesia’ (Roe at 86). However, despite this significant societal benefit—it was 
the injuries suffered by the claimants in Roe which first alerted the medical profession to this 
particular danger—the effect of the Court of Appeal’s decision was that the full cost or burden of this 
medical advance was borne solely by the unfortunate men. This apparent injustice was rejected by 
Denning LJ:
[W]e should be doing a disservice to the community at large if we impose liability on 
hospitals and doctors for everything that happens to go wrong … Initiatives would be stifled 
and confidence shaken … We must insist on due care for the patient at every point, but we 
must not condemn as negligence that which is only a misadventure. (at 87)
Do you agree? Compare Denning LJ’s reasoning in Roe with that in Nettleship—why do you think he 
adopted such a markedly different approach in this case?
p. 237
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 28 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Check our pointers <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-  
resources/horsey9e-chapter-8-pointers-to-pause-for-reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes? 
options=showName> on how to answer the questions posed in this ‘Pause for reflection’.
8.4.2  Seriousness of the injury
The second factor the courts take into account is the seriousness of the injury should it occur. Generally, the 
more serious the potential injury, the more likely the defendant will be found to have fallen below the 
required standard of care should it materialise. After all, ‘the law expects of a man a great deal more care in 
carrying a pound of dynamite than a pound of butter’ (Singleton LJ, quoting Percy H Winfield, in Beckett v 
Newalls Insulation Co Ltd [1953] at 15). In Paris v Stepney Borough Council [1951] the claimant, a garage hand, 
suffered serious injury when a metal chip flew into one of his eyes while he was working. Unfortunately, he 
was already (as his employers knew) blind in his other eye. The injury, therefore, left him effectively blind. He 
sued his employers, claiming they were negligent in failing to provide safety goggles and to require their use 
as part of a safe system of work.51 The majority of the 
↵
House of Lords agreed. Though the chance of 
injury was low, the seriousness of the consequences should an accident occur must also be taken into account 
when assessing the precautions a reasonable employer should take to ensure the safety of their workforce. 
The provision of safety goggles was ‘obviously necessary when a one-eyed man was put to [this] kind of 
work’ (at 383).
Similarly, in Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Miller Steamship Co Pty Ltd (The Wagon Mound) (No 2) [1967] the 
defendants carelessly transferred furnace oil from a nearby wharf onto a vessel, the Wagon Mound, which was 
moored in Sydney Harbour, causing a large quantity of the oil to spill into the harbour where it accumulated 
around the wharf and the claimants’ vessels. The owners of the wharf were carrying out repairs on the 
claimants’ ships which caused pieces of hot metal to fly off and into the wharf. On one such occasion it is 
thought that the metal fell onto an object supporting a piece of inflammable material in the oil-covered 
water, which subsequently ignited. This caused the oil to catch alight and the ensuing fire quickly destroyed 
the wharf and the claimants’ vessels. The Privy Council held that although the chance of the oil catching fire 
was very low it was nevertheless a real one and, given the very grave consequences should the risk 
materialise, there was no justification for the defendant’s failure to take steps to eliminate it given how easy it 
was for them to prevent the spillage (had they taken reasonable care in the first place when filling up the 
vessel). On this basis, the defendants had fallen below the standard of care required—the reasonable man 
would have taken precautions.
If a real risk is one which would occur to the mind of a reasonable man in the position of the 
defendant’s servant and which he would not brush aside as far-fetched … then surely he would not 
neglect such a risk if action to eliminate it presented no difficulty, involved no disadvantage, and 
required no expense. (at 643–4)52
51
p. 238
52
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 29 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
8.4.3  Cost of taking precautions
The courts also consider the cost to the defendant of taking precautions against the risk. The lower the cost— 
whether in terms of time or money—the more reasonable it is that someone should take precautions. Thus, it 
is likely (all things being equal) that the courts would consider a driver who fails to slow down while driving 
near a school at the end of the school day to have fallen below the standard of care required of a reasonable 
driver—the cost to the driver of driving more slowly is unlikely to be seen as unreasonably high. If, on the 
other hand, the cost of taking precautions is very onerous, it is less likely that it will be considered reasonable 
for the defendants to bear such costs—especially, but not only, when the risk of injury is low (Latimer v AEC 
Ltd [1953]).53
Traditionally the courts have been reluctant to interfere with the budgetary decisions made in relation to 
limited resources by public authorities. In Knight v Home Office [1990], a mentally ill prisoner committed 
suicide. As a known suicide risk, he had been observed every 15 minutes. The court recognised that while lack 
of funds could never be a complete defence to insufficient safety precautions, the facilities of a prison hospital 
were necessarily different to a specialist psychiatric hospital and so, on the facts, there was no breach of the 
prison officers’ 
↵
duty of care. However, in Goldscheider v Royal Opera House Covent Garden Foundation 
[2019] the Court of Appeal found the Royal Opera House (ROH), a charity based in Covent Garden, London, 
liable for the injuries suffered by one of its performers. The claimant, a viola player in the orchestra of the 
ROH, was able to recover for the damage caused to his hearing as a result by being placed too close to the 
trumpet section in the orchestra ‘pit’. Despite undertaking a risk assessment and providing performers with 
ear plugs and training, the ROH had failed to take ‘all reasonably practical steps’ to protect the claimant’s 
hearing in breach of the Control of Noise at Work Regulations 2005. McCombe and Bean LJJ continued:
It is in our judgment particularly significant that the pit was [later] reconfigured … with the brass 
instruments being split up. There is no evidence that this caused an unacceptable reduction (or 
indeed any reduction at all) in the artistic standards of … [the Wagner opera the claimant was 
performing] when it came to be performed in public. Alterations made by defendants after a 
workplace accident do not necessarily demonstrate liability retrospectively, but they do make it very 
difficult for the defendant to prove that all reasonably practicable steps had already been taken. (at 
[42])
8.4.4  Social value of the activity
While an assessment of the ‘cost of taking precautions’ goes to the private costs of adhering to a particular 
standard of care imposed on the individual, this final factor relates to the social costs of the activity. The 
greater the social value of the activity, the more likely the courts will find it reasonable to have dispensed with 
safety precautions.
While there is no special exemption for any of the emergency services from the law of negligence (the 
question remains whether the defendant has behaved as a reasonable man), the court will take into account 
the emergency in which the defendant is acting. The standard of care will usually therefore be lower where 
the defendant is acting in the ‘heat of the moment’ or in an emergency or rescue situation.
53
p. 239
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 30 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Watt v Hertfordshire County Council [1954] 1 WLR 835 (CA)
A fireman was seriously injured by heavy lifting-gear while travelling in the back of a lorry on the 
way to an accident where a woman was trapped under a vehicle. The lorry had not been specially 
fitted to carry the gear in an emergency.
The Court of Appeal, rejecting the fireman’s claim, held that the public benefit justified taking the 
risks associated with failing to adequately secure the lifting-gear in the back of the lorry:
It is well settled that in measuring due care you must balance the risk against the measures 
necessary to eliminate the risk. To that proposition there ought to be added this: you must 
balance the risk against the end to be achieved … The saving of life or limb justifies taking 
considerable risk. (Denning LJ at 838)
If, therefore, the same accident had occurred in pursuit of a commercial end then the claimant would 
have recovered: ‘the commercial end to make a profit is very different from the human end to save life 
or limb’ (at 838).54
↵
But what about other ‘socially valuable’ activities such as sports events or games between children?
In the context of sporting events,
the threshold for liability is in practice inevitably high; the proof of a breach of duty will not flow 
from proof of no more than an error of judgment or from mere proof of a momentary lapse in skill 
(and thus care) respectively when subject to the stresses of a race [or game or match]. Such are no 
more than incidents inherent in the nature of the sport. (HHJ Walden-Smith, Tylicki v Gibbons 
[2021] at [26] referring to Holland J in Caldwell)
Liability is ‘fact specific’ and ‘cannot be resolved in a vacuum’ (Caldwell v Maguire [2002] at [30]). In Condon v 
Basi [1985], the first case to consider the standard of care relating to players in the context of competitive 
sports, the claimant was injured by a ‘reckless and dangerous’ sliding tackle during a Sunday league football 
game. The trial judge held that the tackle amounted to ‘serious and dangerous foul play which showed a 
reckless disregard of the Plaintiff’s safety and which fell far below the standards which might reasonably be 
expected in anyone pursuing the game’. Upholding this decision, Sir John Donaldson MR confirmed that the 
objective standard of care was to be assessed in context: ‘there will of course be a higher degree of care 
required of a player in a First Division football match than of a player in a Fourth Division football match’. 
This was followed in Fulham Football Club v Jones [2022]. The claimant suffered a career-ending injury as the 
result of being tackled by the defendant during an under-18 football match. Finding for the defendant, Lane J 
held that in determining the relevant standard of care in a negligence claim in the context of sports injuries 
54
p. 240
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 31 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
the court will have regard to the context and realities of the relevant sport and that the standard of care for 
establishing liability in negligence is ‘materially higher’ than a mere breach of the rules of the game (the 
referee in this case had not awarded a foul and allowed play to continue).55
This approach has also been adopted outside the context of organised sports. In Blake v Galloway [2004], for 
example, a teenager was injured while playing a ‘game’ which involved throwing bark and twigs at each 
other. The Court of Appeal held that there had been no breach of duty:
If the defendant in the present case had departed from the tacit understandings or conventions of 
the play and, for example, had thrown a stone at the claimant, or deliberately aimed the piece of bark 
at the claimant’s head, then there might have been a breach of the duty of care. But what happened 
here was, at its highest, ‘an error of judgment or lapse of skill’ (to quote from Diplock LJ), and that is 
not sufficient to amount to a failure to take reasonable care in the circumstances of horseplay such 
as that in which these youths were engaged … This was a most unfortunate accident, but it was just 
that. Young persons will always want to play vigorous games and indulge in horseplay, and from 
time to time accidents will occur and injuries will be caused. But, broadly speaking, the victims of 
such accidents will usually not be able to recover damages unless they can show that the injury has 
been caused by a failure to take care which amounts to recklessness or a very high degree of 
carelessness, or that it was caused deliberately (i.e. with intent to cause harm). (Dyson LJ at [15], 
[25])
However, it is clear following Scout Association v Barnes [2010] that the social value of an activity as a whole 
does not mean that all examples of that activity are acceptable, whatever the risk:
Of course, the law of tort must not interfere with activities just because they carry some risk. Of 
course, the law of tort must not stamp out socially desirable activities. But whether the social 
↵
benefit of an activity is such that the degree of risk it entails is acceptable is a question of fact, 
degree and judgment, which must be decided on an individual basis and not by a broad brush 
approach. (Smith LJ at [49])
In Barnes, the claimant was injured while playing a game called ‘Objects in the Dark’ which involved running 
around a pile of wooden blocks in a scout hall and attempting to grab a block once the lights were switched 
off (with only minimal lighting provided by emergency exit lights). The majority of the Court of Appeal 
upheld the trial judge’s decision that the defendant had breached its duty—the value of playing the game in 
the dark as a way of adding ‘spice’ to increase the boys’ enjoyment of the game, and which ‘might well 
encourage boys to attend scouts—a desirable objective—did not justify the increased foreseeable risk’ (Smith 
LJ at 46).
55
p. 241
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 32 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
Though it is clear from the majority judgments in Barnes that the trial judge had appropriately 
weighed the costs and benefits of the competing factors at issue in the case, there is considerable force 
in Ward LJ’s dissenting opening paragraph:
I have to confess that I have found it uncommonly difficult to reach a confident judgment in 
this case. Here was a big strong thirteen year old lad, well-used to rough and tumble, playing 
rugby with distinction for his county, ever ready to take the bumps and the bruises, ever 
willingly to put his body on the line for the thrill of his sport. For him, you get hurt, you get 
up, and you get on with it. He brought the same enthusiasm and competitive instincts to his 
participation in his local Scout troop. He was the least likely boy to need wrapping in cotton 
wool. So, is awarding him damages for an injury suffered playing the game, ‘Objects in the 
Dark’, not an example of an overprotective nanny state robbing youth of fun simply because 
there was some risk involved in the exercise? Is this a decision which emasculates those 
responsible for caring for our children and in so doing, enfeebles the children themselves? 
Where do you draw the line? I have found that hard to answer. (at [50])
Do you think that the majority drew the line correctly in this case? To what extent, if at all, can it be 
reconciled with the decision in Blake v Galloway?
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-8-4>.
8.5  Parliamentary interventions
In recent years, successive governments have made various (unnecessary) interventions in an effort to 
address the perception of a growing compensation culture in the UK.56 The Compensation Act 2006 is one 
example. Speaking in 2005, the then Prime Minister, Tony Blair, suggested its purpose was to:
clarify the existing common law on negligence to make clear that there is no liability in negligence 
for untoward incidents that could not be avoided by taking reasonable care or exercising 
↵
reasonable skill … This will send a strong signal and it will also reduce risk-averse behaviour 
by providing reassurance to those who may be concerned about possible litigation, such as 
volunteers, teachers and local authorities.57
56
p. 242
57
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 33 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
To this end, section 1 determines that the courts when considering a claim in negligence or breach of 
statutory duty may ‘have regard to’ the wider impact of their assessment of the appropriate standard of care 
in a particular case—in particular, whether a requirement to take those steps might: (a) prevent a desirable 
activity from being undertaken at all, to a particular extent or in a particular way; or (b) discourage persons 
from undertaking functions in connection with a desirable activity. Of course, this adds little to our 
understanding of the tort of negligence. As Jackson LJ in Barnes notes, it simply restates what we already 
know, that:
the function of the law of tort [is] to deter negligent conduct and to compensate those who are the 
victims of such conduct. It is not the function of the law of tort to eliminate every iota of risk or to 
stamp out socially desirable activities. (at [34])58
Nevertheless, in 2015 the Compensation Act was joined by another unnecessary piece of legislation: the Social 
Action, Responsibility and Heroism (SARAH) Act 2015. At just 176 words long and enacted as part of the 
Coalition government’s ‘wider programme to encourage participation in civil society and … a specific 
commitment to “take a range of measures to encourage volunteering and involvement in social action”’,59 
the SARAH Act lists three matters—social action, responsibility and heroism—to which a court must have 
regard in determining a claim in negligence or breach of statutory duty. Save for a passing reference in the 
unrelated case of Long v Elegant Resorts Ltd [2021] it is yet to be applied in a reported case.
Watch our video ‘Where Angels Fear to Tread: Unnecessarily law-making and the Social Action, 
Responsibility and Heroism Act 2015’ where we look at what the 2015 Act tells us about what happens when 
Parliament steps in to ‘fix’ a non-existent problem.
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 8: Where angels fear to tread: unnecessary law-making and the Social Action, Responsibility and Heroism Act 2015
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-8-5>.
8.6  Establishing breach
You will remember that in order to establish whether the defendant has breached their duty of care two 
questions need to be considered:
How the defendant ought to have behaved in the circumstances—what was the required standard of 
care in these circumstances?
58
59 
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 34 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(2)
How the defendant did behave—did they fall below the standard of care required?
So far, this chapter has concentrated solely on the first of these questions. The second question—that is, 
proof of negligence—is largely a question of fact to be determined by the court on the evidence before them. 
The burden is on the claimant to establish, on the balance of probabilities—that is, that it is more likely than 
not—that the defendant’s actions fell below the required standard of care.60
↵
At times this can be extremely difficult. In many cases, the claimant will have to rely on the defendant 
releasing certain information to them (which they are unlikely, understandably, to be willing to do) or the 
information may be highly technical or simply very dense. The latter is particularly so in relation to litigation 
arising out of a defective drug where it can be very time-consuming and expensive to sift through the 
scientific and medical evidence.61 Things are slightly more straightforward in relation to road traffic 
accidents. Section 11 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 shifts the burden of proof onto the defendant to show that 
he was not negligent and that his conduct (although criminal) does not amount to civil negligence. While a 
criminal conviction (or breach of the Highway Code (Brown v Paterson [2010])) does not automatically 
establish negligence, it is admissible in civil proceedings as prima facie evidence of negligence. It is highly 
likely, therefore, that a driver who, for example, is convicted of injuring another by their careless driving, will 
also be found to be negligent.62
The courts may also infer negligence from the circumstances in which the accident or injury took place. This 
process is usually described by the phrase res ipsa loquitur meaning ‘the thing speaks for itself’. Academics 
disagree on the precise status of the ‘doctrine’.63 Some argue that it simply reflects the common-sense view 
that sometimes the likelihood that the accident was caused by the defendant’s negligence is such that it is not 
necessary to explain it, while others suggest that it is a more formal doctrine which, in certain circumstances, 
shifts the burden of proof from the claimant to the defendant (meaning that they will be liable if they are 
unable to prove, on the balance of probabilities, the absence of fault on their part). Most agree that this latter 
view goes too far. We prefer the view of Jenny Steele, who describes res ipsa loquitur as not so much a doctrine 
‘as a complex name for a common-sense inference from the facts’.64 So understood, res ipsa loquitur does not 
shift or reverse the burden of proof onto the defendant. It simply means that sometimes the circumstances of 
the negligence can be evidence of carelessness. As such it is a welcome and effective means of redressing the 
balance of power between claimant and defendant where evidential difficulties make it hard for the claimant 
to establish negligence.
Whatever its status, the ‘doctrine’ stems from the judgment of Erle CJ in Scott v London and St Katherine Docks 
Co [1895] in which the claimant was injured by falling bags of sugar which were being loaded by the 
defendant’s crane. In response to the defendant’s failure to explain how the injury occurred, Erle CJ stated:
There must be reasonable evidence of negligence, but, where the thing is shown to be under the 
management of the defendant, or his servants, and the accident is such as, in the ordinary course of 
things, does not happen if those who have the management of the machinery use proper care, it 
affords reasonable evidence, in the absence of explanation of the defendant, that the accident arose 
from want of care. (at 601)
60
p. 243
61
62
63
64
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 35 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Two things need to be met in order for the rule to come into play (although these often run together). First, 
the thing which caused the accident needs to be ‘under the management of the defendant, or his servants’, 
that is, the defendant needs to have control of the thing that 
↵
caused the injury. A defendant will not be 
liable if, for example, someone steals their car and causes an accident, or for a hotel guest throwing furniture 
out of a hotel window (Larson v St Francis Hotel [1948]). Secondly, the accident must be such as ‘in the 
ordinary course of things, does not happen if those who have the management of the [things] use proper 
care’. This, largely, depends on the circumstances of the case—it will be easier to prove negligence if you slip 
on a wet floor near a swimming pool or gym (where the occupiers may be expected to know that the floor 
might be wet and take appropriate precautions) than in a shopping centre (Ward v Tesco Stores Ltd [1976]). 
The question for the court is whether the evidence taken as a whole points in the direction of the defendant’s 
negligence. Thus, where the defendant is unable to explain how the accident occurred but is able to show that 
they exercised all reasonable care in the circumstances, they will not be found liable (J v North Lincolnshire 
County Council [2000]).
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-8-6>.
8.7  Conclusion
In this chapter, we have considered the second part of a claim in the tort of negligence—breach of duty of care. 
This occurs where a defendant has fallen below the standard of care required by law. In setting the standard 
of care, the courts seek to balance issues relating to the public benefit against individual freedom and 
responsibility. This takes the form of two questions: (1) what was the required standard of care in these 
circumstances? (2) And did the defendant fall below this standard? When setting the standard of care the 
courts compare the actions of the defendant to those of the ‘reasonable man’. This is an objective test 
(although the courts, on occasions, may incorporate the defendant’s age and skills into their assessment). 
When setting the standard of care required of the defendant—that is, what the defendant ought to have done 
or what is reasonable in the circumstances of the case—the courts take a number of factors into account: 
probability or risk of the injury; the seriousness of the injury; the cost of taking precautions; and sometimes 
the social value of the activity.
The second question—that is, proof of negligence—is largely a question of fact to be determined by the court 
on the evidence before them. The claimant is sometimes helped when seeking to establish on the balance of 
probabilities that the defendant breached their duty of care by the ‘doctrine’ of res ipsa loquitur.
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
p. 244
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 36 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
2
3
4
→
→
→
→
→
In Bolton v Stone the cricket club was not held liable. What was the role of reasonable foreseeability? Do you 
agree with the outcome of the case?
What was the reasoning behind Nettleship? Is it a fair decision? Fair (or unfair) to whom?
When should a doctor warn patients of a risk related to their treatment?
‘It is better to control liability by adjusting the standard of care than by restricting the circumstances in which 
a duty of care arises.’ Discuss.
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-8-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Answering the problem question
Consider again the problem question at the start of this chapter. Now having read about the topic, what 
would be your advice to the various parties?
Here are some pointers to get you started:
Mpho’s claim against Gabriel is relatively straightforward—the question is whether Gabriel has fallen 
below the standard expected of a reasonable driver. You should consider what difference, if any, the fact that 
he’s just passed his test makes.
Aput’s claim against the doctor is more complicated. You will need to consider whether the doctor has 
breached their duty of care in failing to warn them about the risks of surgery—has Aput been given the 
opportunity to give their ‘informed consent’? See Bolam, Montgomery and McCulloch.
Also remember the question asks you to ‘advise Mpho and Aput’ so although this is a ‘breach’ question you 
should consider all the elements of a claim in negligence.
If you need some more guidance:
See the annotated version of the problem with issues and cases to consider <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-8-annotated- 
problem-question-interactive>.
Check your answer against the suggested outline answer <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-8-answers-to-problem-question>.
p. 245
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 37 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Further reading
Much of the academic writing in this area focuses on medical negligence and, in particular, the effect of Bolam and 
more recently Montgomery.
Abraham, Haim ‘Queering the Reasonable Person’ in Kirsty Horsey (ed) Diverse Voices in Tort Law (Bristol University 
Press 2023) 57
Beever, Allan ‘Negligence and Utility’ (2017) 17 Oxford University Commonwealth Law Journal 85
Brazier, Margaret and José Miola ‘Bye-Bye Bolam: A Medical Litigation Revolution?’ (2000) 8 Medical Law Review 85
Cave, Emma and Caterina Milo ‘Informing Patient: The Bolam Legacy’ (2020) 20 Medical Law International 103
Conaghan, Joanne ‘Tort Law and the Feminist Critique of Reason’ in Anne Bottomley (ed) Feminist Perspectives on the 
Foundational Subjects of Law (Cavendish 1996) 47
Gardiner, Bruce ‘Liability for Sporting Injuries’ [2008] Journal of Personal Injury Law 16
Goudkamp, James and Melody Ihuoma ‘A Tour of the Tort of Negligence’ [2016] Professional Negligence 137
Herbert, Rebecca ‘The Compensation Act 2006’ [2006] Journal of Personal Injury Law 337
Heywood, Robert and José Miola ‘The Changing Face of Pre-operative Medical Disclosure: Placing the Patient at the 
Heart of the Matter’ (2017) 133 Law Quarterly Review 296
↵
Miola, José ‘The Standard of Care in Medical Negligence—Still Reasonably Troublesome?’ in Janice Richardson and 
Erika Rackley (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Tort Law (Routledge 2012) 163
Mulheron, Rachael ‘Trumping Bolam: A Critical Legal Analysis of Bolitho’s “Gloss”’ [2010] Cambridge Law Journal 609
Nolan, Donal ‘Varying the Standard of Care in Negligence’ [2013] Cambridge Law Journal 651
Sheldon, Sally ‘A Responsible Body of Medical Men Skilled in that Particular Art: Rethinking the Bolam Test’ in Sally 
Sheldon and Michael Thomson (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Health Care Law (Cavendish 1998)
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-8-web-links?options=showName>.
Notes
 
1. Since July 2021, Little Amal, a 12-foot puppet, has travelled over 9,000km across 13 countries representing all 
children fleeing war, violence and persecution. Read more here: www.walkwithamal.org <http://  
www.walkwithamal.org>.
 
2. Tony Weir An Introduction to Tort Law (2nd edn OUP 2006) 57.
p. 246
1.
2.
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 38 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
3. See e.g. Press Association ‘Paralysed teacher loses £5m “welly-wanging” damages claim’ The Guardian 13 August 
2012 (discussing Cornish Glennroy Blair-Ford v CRS Adventures Ltd [2012]), BBC News ‘Charlotte Shaw mother loses 
death claim’ 28 June 2012 (discussing Wilkin-Shaw v Fuller & Kingsley School Bideford Enterprises Ltd [2012]) and BBC 
News ‘Former RAF man wins right to sue MoD over game injury’ 2 February 2011 (discussing Uren v Corporate Leisure 
(UK) Ltd [2011]); Alexandra Topping ‘Parents win appeal over head injury on bouncy castle’ The Guardian 1 August 
2008 (discussing Perry v Harris [2008]).
 
4. See e.g. Ragnar E Löfstedt ‘Reclaiming Health and Safety for all: a review of progress one year on’ January 2013; 
Ragnar E Löfstedt ‘Reclaiming Health and Safety for all: an independent review of health and safety legislation’ 
November 2011; Health and Safety Executive ‘School trips and outdoor learning activities: tackling the health and 
safety myths’ 6 June 2011.
 
5. Indeed school compensation claims are increasingly ‘big business’—see e.g. Matthew Davis ‘Schools pay £1.5m in 
compensation cases including £7,500 for a child who had a splinter’ Daily Mirror 22 August 2015. One may have a 
certain amount of sympathy with Tomlinson LJ’s observation in Richards v London Borough of Bromley [2012] that ‘[i]t 
needs to be understood that not every misfortune occurring on school premises attracts compensation’ (at [15]). See 
further on the ‘compensation culture’, section 1.3.2.
 
6. Joanne Conaghan ‘Tort Law and the Feminist Critique of Reason’ in Anne Bottomley (ed) Feminist Perspectives on 
the Foundational Subjects of Law (Cavendish 1996) 47, 52.
 
7. ibid 58. See also Mayo Moran Rethinking the Reasonable Person (OUP 2003) and Haim Abraham ‘Queering the 
Reasonable Person’ in Kirsty Horsey (ed) Diverse Voices in Tort Law (Bristol University Press 2024) 57.
 
8. Not everyone agrees with this point. See e.g. Peter Cane and James Goudkamp who argue that the reasonable 
person is invoked in order to obscure the role of the judge as a policy-maker (Atiyah’s Accidents, Compensation and the 
Law (9th edn CUP 2018) 30).
 
9. However, as we will see later, the courts have developed a number of modifications to the general standard, e.g. in 
relation to children and people professing to have a particular skill.
 
10. On the relevance of a criminal conviction on a civil claim, see section 8.6.
 
11. See section 10.4.
 
12. Cane and Goudkamp n8 40.
 
13. The Australian High Court, in a case on very similar facts, refused to follow Nettleship and described it as ‘contrary 
to common sense and the concept of what is reasonable in the circumstances’ (Cook v Cook [1986]) (though in this 
case the defendant had fallen below the (lower) standard of care required of a learner driver).
 
14. Though cf Wooldridge v George [2017] in which it was held that the driver, who was within the speed limit and who 
was not distracted, should have seen the claimant crossing the road and taken evasive action to avoid hitting him.
 
15. An argument made by Patrick Atiyah in The Damages Lottery (Hart 1997).
 
16. Tort Law (Macmillan 2021) 5.
 
17. See further James Goudkamp and Melody Ihuoma ‘A Tour of the Tort of Negligence’ [2016] Professional Negligence 
137, 138–44 and Maria Orchard ‘Liability in Negligence of the Mentally Ill: A Comment on Dunnage v Randell’ (2016) 45 
Common Law World Review 366.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 39 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
18. WE Peel and James Goudkamp Winfield & Jolowicz on Tort (19th edn Sweet & Maxwell 2014) 277.
 
19. See also e.g. Wells v Cooper [1958], where a do-it-yourself (DIY) carpenter was not liable for injuries caused by his 
failure to use adequate screws to fix a door handle. He had not fallen below the standard of care expected of a 
reasonably competent non-professional carpenter (which was lower than that required of a professional carpenter). 
See also Perry v Harris [2008] (discussed in section 8.4.1).
 
20. Note: the decision in Wilsher was appealed to the House of Lords on the issue of causation where the standard of 
care issue was not discussed.
 
21. Margaret Brazier and José Miola ‘Bye-Bye Bolam: A Medical Litigation Revolution?’ (2000) 8 Medical Law Review 85, 
87.
 
22. The issue as to the extent to which ‘doctors know best’ was alive and kicking in the heated debates surrounding the 
(failed) Medical Innovation Bill 2014–15 (the so-called ‘Saatchi Bill’) and its later reincarnation as the Access to Medical 
Treatments (Innovation) Act 2016. They both attracted significant—and well-judged—criticism from legal and medical 
professionals alike. See e.g. José Miola ‘Bye-Bye Bolitho? The Curious Case of the Medical Innovation Bill’ (2015) 15 
Medical Law International 124.
 
23. Sally Sheldon ‘A Responsible Body of Medical Men Skilled in that Particular Art: Rethinking the Bolam Test’ in Sally 
Sheldon and Michael Thomson (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Health Care Law (Cavendish 1998) 20–1.
 
24. ibid 19. For an insightful ‘update’ of Sheldon’s critique of the standard of care, see José Miola ‘The Standard of Care 
in Medical Negligence—Still Reasonably Troublesome?’ in Janice Richardson and Erika Rackley (eds) Feminist 
Perspectives on Tort Law (Routledge 2012) 163.
 
25. Lord Woolf ‘Are the Courts Excessively Deferential to the Medical Profession?’ (2001) 9 Medical Law Review 1–16 at 
1.
 
26. Miola n24 614. See further McGuinn v Lewisham and Greenwich NHS Trust [2017] applying Bolitho to find the doctor 
in breach of their duty of care (in failing to appreciate that the foetus the claimant was carrying was at risk of suffering 
from microcephaly) because their actions ‘lacked a sufficiently logical and rational basis’ (at [175]) and Simon Fox 
‘Bolam is Dead. Long Live Bolam’ (2019) 4 Professional Negligence 213.
 
27. Rachael Mulheron ‘Trumping Bolam: A Critical Legal Analysis of Bolitho’s “Gloss”’ [2010] Cambridge Law Journal 
609, 613.
 
28. Indeed, in Ministry of Justice v Carter [2010] the Court of Appeal overturned the decision of a trial judge who did this. 
For a clear example of the judicial process of determining whether a defendant has breached their duty of care, see 
Wells and Smith v University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust [2015].
 
29. Brazier and Miola n21.
 
30. Lords Reed and Kerr, Montgomery at [86]. In Chester, the majority of the House of Lords stepped around Sidaway 
(rather than deviating from it) to hold that a doctor who had not informed the patient of a very small risk which 
accompanied the course of treatment he was suggesting had not only breached his duty of care but also that the 
patient’s ability to make an informed choice about her treatment was so important that they were willing to extend 
the rules on causation in order to allow her claim: ‘Her right of autonomy and dignity can and ought to be vindicated 
by a narrow and modest departure from traditional causation principles’ (Lord Steyn at [24]). On the causation 
aspects of Chester, see further section 9.2.2.3.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 40 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
31. It took 16 years for Montgomery to make its way through the courts. At its heart is the care of a—now—16-year-old 
boy. It has since been reported that Ms Montgomery has been awarded between £5–5.25 million in damages which will 
allow her, in her words ‘to ensure Sam receives the best possible care for the rest of his life’ (BBC News ‘Nadine 
Montgomery wins £5m from NHS Lanarkshire over brain damage to son’ 11 March 2015). You may also like to listen to 
this excellent podcast episode (Kings Chambers Debrief E10: ‘Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board (Part II <http://  
www.buzzsprout.com/179951/2134727>)’) produced by Kings Chambers which features a conversation between Nigel 
Poole KC and Nadine Montgomery. They talk about her experience of taking her case all the way to the Supreme Court 
and the ramifications of the judgment. The podcast is just over 22 minutes long so if you don’t have time to listen to it 
right now, just make a note to return to it later—or perhaps download it to listen to on the way to your tort seminar!
 
32. See Kirsty Keywood ‘The Death of Sidaway: Values, Judgments and Informed Consent’ Journal of Medical Ethics 
blog 15 March 2015.
 
33. See discussion of the so-called forced caesarean section cases in section 15.5.1.
 
34. See further Erika Rackley Women Judging and the Judiciary: From Difference to Diversity (Routledge 2013) chs 5 and 
6.
 
35. Keywood n32.
 
36. NHS Litigation Authority ‘Ten Years of Maternity Claims: An Analysis of NHS Litigation Authority Data’ (2012).
 
37. See here the Royal College of Surgeons guidance on Montgomery discussed in David Hart ‘Informed consent: 
Surgeons respond to Montgomery’ UK Human Rights blog 30 October 2016.
 
38. See David Hart ‘Supreme Court reverses informed consent ruling: Sidaway is dead’ UK Human Rights blog 13 March 
2015.
 
39. Andrew Hockton ‘“Informed consent” has arrived’ The Times 19 March 2015.
 
40. See further, Nigel Poole ‘After Montgomery—Part Two: Recommended Treatment, Risk and Dialogue’ Learned 
Friend 12 September 2018.
 
41. NHS Resolution ‘Case of note: McCulloch (deceased) v Forth Valley Health Board (Supreme Court—12 July 2023)’ 19 
October 2023.
 
42. See further Louise Austin ‘McCulloch v Forth Valley Health Board [2023] UKSC 26: Hello Bolam, the court’s old 
friend’ [2024] Medical Law Review 264, 273.
 
43. See e.g. Emma Cave and Caterina Milo ‘Informing Patients: The Bolam Legacy’ (2020) 20 Medical Law International 
103; Gemma Turton ‘Informed Consent to Medical Treatment Post-Montgomery: Causation and Coincidence’ [2018] 
Medical Law Review 108; George G Buttigieg ‘Re-visiting Bolam and Bolitho in the Light of Montgomery v Lanarkshire 
Health Board’ (2018) 86 Medico-Legal Journal 42; Nigel Poole ‘After Montgomery—Part Two: Bolam Returns’ Learned 
Friend 12 September 2018; Sarah W Chan et al ‘Montgomery and Informed Consent: Where Are We Now?’ (2017) 357 
British Medical Journal 2224.
 
44. For a summary of the literature, see Isabelle Le Gallez et al ‘Montgomery’s Legal and Practical Impact: A Systematic 
Review at 6 Years’ (2022) 28(4) Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice 690.
 
45. For a recent application of this principle, see Mohmed v Barnes and EUI Ltd [2019] in which the court held the 
defendant had not fallen below the standard of a reasonable driver placed in the threatening and rapidly deteriorating 
situation he found himself in (at [52]).
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 41 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
46. ‘Social costs’ here include not only financial but also ‘immeasurable “soft” values such as community concepts of 
justice, health, life and freedom of conduct’ (Western Suburbs Hospital v Currie [1987]). The assessment of community 
values can be tricky. How are we to compare, to use Cane and Goudkamp’s example, the social value of playing cricket 
with the safety of passers-by so as to decide whether it is negligent to play cricket without a fence (n8 33)?
 
47. Cane and Goudkamp n8 32.
 
48. Joanne Conaghan and Wade Mansell The Wrongs of Tort (2nd edn Pluto Press 1999) 62.
 
49. It was agreed that nuisance could not be established in the absence of negligence (at 860).
 
50. See also Lewis v Wandsworth London Borough Council [2020].
 
51. See further section 13.2.3.
 
52. Note this is the second of the Wagon Mound cases. The first, Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock and 
Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound) (No 1) [1961], brought by the owners of the wharf, is discussed in the context of 
remoteness in Chapter 9.
 
53. Discussed in section 13.2.4.
 
54. See more recently MacLeod v The Commissioner of the Police for the Metropolis [2015] discussed in Karen O’Sullivan 
‘Sound the Alarm’ (2015) 165 New Law Journal 7678 at 10.
 
55. See further Vowles v Evans [2003] and Elbanna v Clark [2024]) (rugby), Fulham v Jones [2022] (football), Watson v 
British Boxing Board of Control Ltd [2001] (boxing) and Tylicki v Gibbons [2021] (horse racing).
 
56. Part 2 of the Act addresses the aggressive marketing of the claims management industry, which the government 
stressed was responsible, alongside irresponsible media reporting, for fostering the perception of a compensation 
culture (see generally section 1.3.2 and Rebecca Herbert ‘The Compensation Act 2006’ [2006] Journal of Personal 
Injury Law 337.
 
57. Tony Blair ‘Common Sense Culture not Compensation Culture’ speech delivered at Institute of Public Policy 
Research, 26 May 2005.
 
58. See also comment of Smith LJ in Uren v Corporate Leisure (UK) Ltd [2011] that ‘it was common ground that [the Act] 
… did not add anything to the common law position’ (at [13]).
 
59. Social Action, Responsibility and Heroism Bill, Explanatory Notes at [6].
 
60. The claimant must provide evidence of carelessness if an action in negligence is to disclose a good cause of action. 
If the claimant is unable to do this, the defendant may apply for summary judgment (which means the claim will fail 
without further argument).
 
61. This difficulty was addressed by Parliament in Part 1 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, see Chapter 12.
 
62. See Lord Denning MR’s discussion of the claimant’s liability in Nettleship at 698–9.
 
63. Patrick Atiyah ‘Res Ipsa Loquitur in England and Australia’ (1972) 35 Modern Law Review 337.
 
64. Jenny Steele Tort Law: Text, Cases, and Materials (5th edn OUP 2017) 157.
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
8. Breach of duty: The standard of care
Page 42 of 42
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
