20. Vicarious liability
Page 1 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
20. Vicarious liability
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0020
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter examines the principle of vicarious liability, a form of secondary liability through which employers may, in certain 
circumstances, be liable for the torts of their employees, even though the employer themselves may be entirely blameless. The 
imposition of vicarious liability is one of the most important exceptions to the general approach of the common law whereby 
liability for any wrongdoing is imposed on, and only on, the wrongdoer(s). A defendant will not be vicariously liable unless the 
following conditions are met: (a) there is an employer–employee relationship (or one akin to this) between the defendant and 
the person for whose actions they are being held liable; and (b) a close connection between this relationship and the tortious 
wrongdoing of the employee
Keywords: 
tort law, liability, compensation, damage payments, claim
Problem question
Read this problem question carefully and keep it in mind while you are working through the 
chapter that follows. At the end of the chapter you will be able to apply what you have learnt to the 
problem question and advise the relevant parties.
The Horsechester Arms is a popular restaurant and bar. Mario, its owner, prides himself on its mellow 
atmosphere and friendly staff. However, behind the scenes it is a different story.
Qiang, the restaurant’s sommelier, and Tadhg, the head chef, have fallen out over Qiang’s wine 
choices for his signature dish. Eventually Tadhg’s quick temper gets the better of him—he grabs an 
empty wine bottle and hits Qiang across the back of the head. Meanwhile, Cadbury Blacker, the local 
p. 608
20. Vicarious liability
Page 2 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
librarian, is setting up for her regular evening set singing chilled out versions of 90s indie classics. As 
Tadhg storms out from the kitchen he trips over a lead she has failed to tape down, and twists his 
ankle. Lux, the restaurant manager, phones Dougal at home to see if he can come in to cover Qiang’s 
shift. Dougal had been expecting to have the night off and had just settled down to watch TV. Though 
Lux makes it clear he does not have to come in, Dougal is irritated by their request. He cycles to the 
restaurant and when he gets there he punches them.
Meanwhile, Phoenix is walking around the bar talking to the customers. He is employed as a host to 
make the guests feel comfortable, and so is a well-known figure at the bar. Bella has been coming to 
the bar for a few weeks and Phoenix has been particularly welcoming. He often encourages her to stay 
late to help him tidy up and then gives her a lift home in his sports car. After one such occasion Bella 
complains that Phoenix has sexually assaulted her. A subsequent criminal investigation upholds her 
claim.
Advise the parties.
20.1  Introduction
Consider the following situations:
A young girl is injured when she falls out of a recycling van when the driver negligently speeds round a 
corner. She was helping the refuse workers on their rounds, against the wishes of their employer.
A school teacher sexually assaults a pupil over several nights during a school trip.1
An office worker is subjected to a sustained period of homophobic harassment and intimidation by her 
supervisor.
Consider the examples above. There are a number of potential civil and criminal claims. Most obviously, the 
injured girl may wish to sue the driver of the recycling van in negligence, the office worker might bring a 
claim against his supervisor under the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, while, alongside a criminal 
prosecution, the school pupil might bring a claim against his teacher in the tort of battery. In each case, the 
van driver, supervisor and teacher would be both the defendant and the tortfeasor, that is the person who 
committed the tort. But what of their employers? Might they also be liable? If they’ve been negligent—for 
example, in failing to provide a safe place of work—the claimants may argue that they are personally liable for 
their injuries.2 However, they may also be liable vicariously for their employees’ actions.
Vicarious liability is a mechanism by which one person (the defendant) is held liable to a claimant for a tort 
committed by someone else (the tortfeasor). Its main application is in employment relationships: an 
employer is vicariously liable for torts committed by their employees in the course of their employment.3 
p. 609
1
2
3 
20. Vicarious liability
Page 3 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Lord Phillips in Christian Brothers described vicarious liability as a doctrine ‘on the move’ (at [19]). Certainly, 
over the last 20 years the law relating to vicarious liability in tort has been ‘transformed’ and as Paula Giliker 
notes, this expansion:
has, perhaps unsurprisingly, brought uncertainty, as litigants test its boundaries. This has led to a 
rapid growth of cases, including six judgments from the House of Lords/Supreme Court between 
2001–2017, three Privy Council decisions over the same period, and numerous Court of Appeal and 
lower court judgments. Attempts by the Supreme Court in 2012 [in Various Claimants v Catholic 
Child Welfare Society [2012], generally known as Christian Brothers] to take stock of the law and 
provide greater guidance, and again in 2016, [in Cox v Ministry of Justice [2016] and Mohamud v WM 
Morrison Supermarkets plc [2016]] have failed to stem the flow of cases.4
More recently, there have been three more Supreme Court judgments—Barclays Bank plc v Various Claimants 
[2020], WM Morrison Supermarkets plc v Various Claimants [2020] and 
↵
Trustees of the Barry 
Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses (Appellant) v BXB [2023]—in which the Supreme Court, again, sought to 
provide some much needed clarity to this area of law.
Watch our video ‘Eight Supreme Court judgments in 19 years—what’s going on?’ where we explore why there 
have been so many vicarious liability cases reaching the UK’s most senior courts over the last two decades.
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 20: Eight Supreme Court judgments in 19 years—what’s going on?
As a form of secondary liability, the imposition of vicarious liability is not predicated on any wrongdoing by 
the employer—they may well be, and often are, entirely blameless. Rather liability is imposed vicariously on 
the employer for the tortious actions of their employee (who remains primarily liable for their actions, 
though is typically not worth pursuing for financial reasons). The idea of vicarious liability is then at odds 
with the general approach of the common law and the principle of corrective justice whereby liability for any 
wrongdoing is imposed on, and only on, the wrongdoer(s). And as such, its imposition of strict, no-fault 
liability requires clear and principled justification. Unfortunately, such guidance has largely been 
unforthcoming. In Maga v Birmingham Roman Catholic Archdiocese Trustees [2010], Longmore LJ commented:
[t]here is by no means universal agreement as to what that policy [behind the imposition of 
vicarious liability] is. Is it that the law should impose liability on someone who can pay rather than 
someone who cannot? Or is it to encourage employers to be even more vigilant than they would be 
pursuant to a duty of care? Or is it just a weapon of distributive justice? Academic writers disagree 
and the House of Lords in Lister’s case [Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001]] did not give any definitive 
guidance to lower courts. (at [81])
4
p. 610
20. Vicarious liability
Page 4 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
At its most basic, vicarious liability is a mechanism that ensures a just and practical remedy for harm, while 
seeking to deter future wrongdoing.5 Its development has typically been seen as the result not of ‘any very 
clear, logical or legal principle, but [of] social convenience and rough justice’ (Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd 
v Shatwell [1965] at 685). Over the years a number of policy objectives or justifications have been offered for 
the imposition of vicarious liability.6
Justifications for the imposition of vicarious liability
The employer is likely to be in a position to compensate the claimant. They not only have, to 
use Glanville Williams’s description, ‘a purse worth opening’ or ‘deeper pockets’ than the 
employee,7 but can also be expected to insure against such liability. The presence of liability 
insurance, in turn, means that vicarious liability acts as ‘a loss-distribution device’ whereby 
the financial loss arising from the wrongdoing can be spread more widely across the 
community through insurance premiums and/or higher prices.
The tort will been committed as a result of activity untaken by the employee on behalf of the 
employer or as part of the business of the employer—the so-called ‘enterprise liability’ or 
‘delegation of task’ arguments.8 These suggest that as employers derive an economic benefit 
from their employees’ work, they should bear any related burdens: ‘a person who employs 
others to advance his own economic interest should in fairness be placed under a 
corresponding liability for losses incurred in the course of the enterprise’.9
↵
 The employer by employing the employee has taken the risk of harm occurring and so, 
as they either gain a benefit from that risk or because of their role in creating it, they should 
bear responsibility should the risk materialise.10
The employee will have been under the ‘control’ of their employers. The imposition of 
vicarious liability therefore acts as an incentive ensuring that employers not only maintain 
standards of ‘good practice’ and take care when making appointments, but explore ways of 
going beyond those set by the standard of the ‘reasonable person’.
Pause for reflection
Courts and commentators tend to argue that vicarious liability can be justified, if at all, on the basis of 
a combination of various policy considerations: the desire to spread losses or shift them on to those 
best positioned to meet them, to encourage greater supervision of workers and so reduce future 
wrongdoing, and a feeling (which may or may not stand up to close scrutiny) that employers should 
take the rough with the smooth and so bear the costs as well as enjoying the benefits of the 
5
6
7
8
9
p. 611
10
20. Vicarious liability
Page 5 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
employees’ actions. Yet, while all these provide reasons for requiring the employer to meet their 
employees’ liabilities, the problem is that if we were really committed to furthering these particular 
policies, the law would look very different.
First, these policy considerations cannot explain the particular rules on vicarious liability that the 
courts have in fact developed. For example, as we will see, vicarious liability depends on the employee 
actually having committed a tort. But the concern to shift or spread losses applies irrespective of 
whether the employee acted wrongfully. So, if we really were motivated to impose liability because 
this would see the losses spread, we would have no reason for limiting vicarious liability to those cases 
where the employee has caused loss by committing a tort. Instead, we would make the employer liable 
wherever their employee causes others loss while doing their job. The same goes for the benefit and 
burden argument. By contrast, the argument that vicarious liability exists to encourage greater 
supervision by employers of their employees’ conduct suggests that liability should be imposed on 
the employer only where this really would be likely to lead to greater supervision and so a reduction of 
future harms. Given the practical limitations on an employer to ‘control’ their employee in the 
modern-day employment context and that most cases of negligence arise from isolated and 
unpredictable acts of carelessness, which the employer could have done nothing to prevent, it is hard 
to argue that this policy supports the present practice of imposing vicarious liability in respect of all 
torts committed in the course of employment.
Secondly, these policy considerations extend beyond the employment context. For example, the 
argument that losses should be spread applies wherever and however someone is injured and so is not 
uniquely applicable when the injury is caused by an employee acting in the course 
↵
of their 
employment. Again, if we really believed that the law of tort should be concerned with spreading 
losses, then we would have no reason for making liability in general dependent on a breach of duty or 
for having a general rule that liability depends on the defendant having caused the relevant loss. If our 
motivation is to spread losses, it should be irrelevant whether the defendant acted carelessly or 
whether they were in any way responsible for the loss that was suffered. Instead, we should impose 
liability on whomever we can find who carries insurance, since this is the best way of seeing the loss 
spread amongst society. That the law generally attaches liability only to those who actually caused the 
claimant’s loss, and then, again as a general rule, only where their conduct has fallen below a 
particular standard, tells us that, at root, the law of torts is not designed to spread losses (though it 
may sometimes have this effect).
The same is true when we look at the other policy justifications for vicarious liability. In each case, a 
real commitment to furthering these policies would lead not only to changes in the law of vicarious 
liability but also to a radically different law of tort—indeed, they would require us to view tort law as 
fundamentally misconceived. But if these policies cannot account for the law of tort generally, then we 
should be suspicious of any attempt to justify particular parts of tort law on this basis. We would be 
p. 612
20. Vicarious liability
Page 6 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
saying that, though generally these are not the policies which justify tort law as a whole, they do 
justify (some of) the rules of tort in the employment context. But why here and not elsewhere? We are 
left with a distinction that appears entirely arbitrary.
Check our pointers <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-  
resources/horsey9e-chapter-20-pointers-to-pause-for-reflection-and-counterpoint-boxes? 
options=showName> on how to answer the questions posed in this ‘Pause for reflection’.
Counterpoint
Of course, we should feel uncomfortable with the conclusion that an important and long-standing 
aspect of tort law is arbitrary and unprincipled. As such, lawyers have sought to find an explanation 
for vicarious liability which is consistent with the basic aims and structure of tort law generally. 
Perhaps the most important example of this is an argument made by Robert Stevens.11
Robert Stevens suggests that we should not view vicarious liability as an instrument for the law to 
impose on one person liability for torts committed by another. Rather it is just one particular example 
of the law on the attribution of conduct. What does this mean? The best example of this comes in 
relation to companies. Companies, as artificial legal constructs, can only ‘act’ (enter contracts, acquire 
property, commit torts) through natural persons (i.e. human beings). Accordingly the law needs a set 
of rules determining whose actions ‘count’ as the actions of the company; for instance, whose consent 
is needed for the company to enter into a contract. Stevens argues that we should understand the 
rules of vicarious liability in the same way. When the law holds an employer vicariously liable it is 
because the actions of the employee are attributed to the employer. The employee’s actions are treated 
as the actions of the employer, and so torts committed by the employee are regarded as torts 
committed by the employer.
This suggests that, contrary to appearances, vicarious liability is not an exception to the general rule 
that the law of tort imposes liability only where the defendant has caused and is responsible for the 
loss suffered by the claimant. If the employee’s actions are treated in law as the employer’s 
↵
actions, then any harms done by the employee are, at the same time, harms done by the 
employer. When the employer is held liable, they are accordingly being held liable for their own 
actions.
Unfortunately, this argument does not solve the problems posed by the law on vicarious liability. Even 
if we accept (and it is not clear why we should) that the law does indeed require, outside the context of 
companies, rules for the attribution of conduct, the question is why has the law chosen this set of 
11
p. 613
20. Vicarious liability
Page 7 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
rules rather than some other? Why should, in the context of employment, the actions of the employee 
be attributed to (and be regarded as the actions of) the employer? This question is particularly 
important given that the effect of such rules is that the employer is held legally liable for losses which 
most of us would regard as caused by, and the responsibility of, someone else.
This question just takes us back to where we started, needing a justification for the rules we have. 
Stevens’s argument, if correct, tells us only what sort of rules these are: namely, rules of attribution. It 
does not tell us why we have or should embrace this particular set of rules. Unless we are content for 
the law to be and to appear arbitrary, these questions require an answer. As such, Stevens’s argument 
ultimately fails to take us beyond the unpersuasive combination of policies set out earlier.
A defendant will be vicariously liable where the following conditions are met:
there is an employer–employee relationship, or one akin to employment, between the defendant and 
the tortfeasor (stage 1); and
there is a close connection between that relationship and the tortious wrongdoing of the employee 
(stage 2).
20.2  Stage 1: A relationship of, or akin to, employment
In order for a defendant to be held vicariously liable for another’s act, the two must be in a relationship of 
employment or one which is regarded as akin to employment. However, identifying when two parties are in 
such a relationship is not as straightforward as one might expect.12 Clearly not everyone you pay to do work 
for you becomes your employee. So, for instance, if you hire a plumber to fix a leaking tap or you take an Uber 
home, though the plumber and Uber driver are, in a sense, doing work for you, we would not, and the law does 
not, call them your employees. Historically, this distinction between ‘employees’ and so-called ‘independent 
contractors’ (a general term applied to those who do work for someone but who are not their employees) has 
been key to the law of vicarious liability. However, while the notion of who is and is not an employee is clear 
at the extremes, things become more indistinct at the borders, particularly in relation to what used to be 
called ‘atypical’ workers—for example, agency workers, homeworkers, part-time workers, the self-employed 
and ‘regular’ casual workers.13 And, of course, the realities of the so-called 
↵
‘gig economy’ mean that 
these types of employment relationships are much more common than they once were.14
So how does a court determine who is an employee? Traditionally, the courts looked to the level of ‘control’ 
the employer exercised, not only over what the potential employee did but over how they did it as a way of 
determining employment status (Stephenson Jordan & Harrison Ltd v McDonall & Evans [1952]). However, in a 
climate where employees are increasingly expected to show—and are rewarded to the extent to which they 
do show—initiative and exercise discretion, this reflects an outdated view of the workplace. As Lord Richards 
noted in Commissioners for His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs v Professional Game Match Officials Ltd [2024]:
12
13
p. 614
14
20. Vicarious liability
Page 8 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
there are many occupations in which the employer would not have the practical ability, nor probably 
the legal right, to intervene during the performance of at least some duties so as to direct the 
manner in which they were performed. It is hard to see that hospital managers would be entitled to 
intervene in the performance of an operation which was being carried out in a competent manner or 
that the managers of an opera house could intervene in the conductor’s performance to direct him or 
her to increase or reduce the tempo. (at [70])
Accordingly, the courts have now taken the view that control is just one of a number of factors considered by 
the courts when determining a worker’s status. Other factors include the extent to which the worker is 
‘managed’ or ‘accountable’ to the employer, the existence of sufficient mutual obligations, the centrality of 
their activates to the enterprise of the employer and the integration of their activities to the employer’s 
business (JGE v The Trustees of the Portsmouth Roman Catholic Diocesan Trust [2012] at [72]).
Various Claimants v Catholic Child Welfare Society [2012] UKSC 56 (SC)
The case was brought by 170 men who had been sexually and physically abused by members (‘the 
brothers’) of a Catholic group—the Brothers of the Christian Schools (‘the Institute’)—who were 
employed as teachers at a residential school for children in local authority care attended by the 
claimants. The abuse was alleged to have taken place over a 40-year period.15
The first question for the court was whether the relationship between the Institute and the brothers 
teaching at the school was one that was capable of giving rise to vicarious liability (stage 1). In the 
Court of Appeal it had been held that, since the brothers were at the time employed by the school, only 
the school (or, rather, the body managing it)—and so not the Institute—could be vicariously liable. 
The Supreme Court disagreed, however, holding that both the school and the Institute were 
vicariously liable for the abuse the brothers had 
↵
committed.16 In reaching this conclusion, the 
court held that, though the brothers were not employed by the Institute, the relationship between 
them was nonetheless sufficiently ‘akin to’ employment as to justify the imposition of vicarious 
liability (an approach adopted by the Court of Appeal in JGE v The Trustees of the Portsmouth Roman 
Catholic Diocesan Trust17).
In coming to this conclusion, Lord Phillips identified five ‘policy reasons’ which support vicarious 
liability in the context of employment relationships:
15
p. 615
16
17
20. Vicarious liability
Page 9 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(i) the employer is more likely to have the means to compensate the victim than the 
employer and can be expected to have insured against that liability; (ii) the tort will have 
been committed as a result of activity being taken by the employee on behalf of the 
employer; (iii) the employee’s activity is likely to be part of the business activity of the 
employer; (iv) the employer, by employing the employee to carry on the activity, will have 
created the risk of the tort committed by the employee; (v) the employee will, to a greater or 
lesser degree, have been under the control of the employer. (at [35])
It is by reference to these five incidents that certain non-employment relationships might nonetheless 
be treated as akin to employment:
Where the defendant and the tortfeasor are not bound by a contract of employment, but their 
relationship has the same incidents, that relationship can properly give rise to vicarious 
liability on the ground that it is ‘akin to that between an employer and an employee’. (at 
[47])
It was on this basis that the relationship between the Institute and the brothers was held to be akin to 
employment: though no contract existed between the Institute and the brothers, the vows the 
brothers gave to the Institute operated in much the same way, and the work the brothers did at the 
school was at the Institute’s direction and done in furtherance of the Institute’s mission and in 
accordance with its rules (at [56]–[60]):
Provided that a brother was acting for the common purpose of the brothers as an 
unincorporated association, the relationship between them would be sufficient … just as in 
the case of the action of a member of a partnership. Had one of the brothers injured a 
pedestrian when negligently driving a vehicle owned by the Institute in order to collect 
groceries for the community few would question that the Institute was vicariously liable for 
his tort. (at [61])
Lord Phillips went on to address the second stage of the vicarious liability test: whether there was a 
sufficiently ‘close connection’ between the acts of abuse and the brothers’ employment such as to 
justify holding the Institute liable for these acts. In finding that the necessary connection had been 
made out, he continued:
20. Vicarious liability
Page 10 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Living cloistered on the school premises were vulnerable boys. They were triply vulnerable. 
They were vulnerable because they were children in a school; they were vulnerable 
↵
because they were virtually prisoners in the school; and they were vulnerable because 
their personal histories made it even less likely that if they attempted to disclose what was 
happening to them they would be believed. The brother teachers were placed in the school to 
care for the educational and religious needs of these pupils. Abusing the boys in their care 
was diametrically opposed to those objectives but, paradoxically, that very fact was one of the 
factors that provided the necessary close connection between the abuse and the relationship 
between the brothers and the Institute that gives rise to vicarious liability on the part of the 
latter. There was a very close connection between the brother teachers’ employment in the 
school and the sexual abuse that they committed, or must for present purposes be assumed 
to have committed. (at [92]–[93])
More information on this case is available in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-20-web-links? 
options=showName>.
Pause for reflection
The impact of the Christian Brothers case is far-reaching. As John Bell notes:
[T]he Supreme Court … rightly side-stepped [the] argument that the peculiar employment 
situation of a particular helper, such as a celebrity presenting a show for a broadcaster or a 
repair mechanic sent out under a service contract who is engaged technically on a self- 
employed basis, can lead the enterprise to evade vicarious liability for the actions of the 
celebrity or repairman. What weighed with the courts in [the Christian Brothers case] and JGE 
is that the abusers were placed by the enterprise, as part of their mission, in a position from 
which the tortfeasor happened to cause a harm which was a risk inherent in the activity in 
question.18
The claims against Blackpool Football Club and Manchester City Football club are, perhaps, cases in 
point.19
The ‘akin to employment’ approach was confirmed by the Supreme Court in Cox v Ministry of Justice [2016]. In 
this case, the Ministry of Justice was held variously liable for the injuries of the catering manager at HM 
Prison Swansea, who was negligently injured by a prisoner, who was carrying out paid work under 
p. 616
18
19
20. Vicarious liability
Page 11 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
supervision in the kitchen, when he dropped a large bag of rice on her upper back. The prisoner’s activity in 
unloading supplies was ‘akin to employment’ even though his relationship to the prison was not voluntary. 
The Christian Brothers case had, it was held, developed ‘a modern theory of vicarious liability’:
The result of this approach is that a relationship other than one of employment is in principle 
capable of giving rise to vicarious liability where harm is wrongfully done by an individual who 
carries on activities as an integral part of the business activities carried on by the defendant 
↵
and for its benefit (rather than his activities being entirely attributable to the conduct of a 
recognisably independent business of his own or of a third party), and where the commission of the 
wrongful act is a risk created by the defendant by assigning those activities to the individual in 
question. (Lord Reed at [24])
The court concluded that this approach was satisfied on the facts:
Prisoners working in the prison kitchens … are integrated into the operation of the prison, so that 
the activities assigned to them by the prison service form an integral part of the activities which it 
carries on in the furtherance of its aims: in particular, the activity of providing meals for prisoners. 
They are placed by the prison service in a position where there is a risk that they may commit a 
variety of negligent acts within the field of activities assigned to them. That is recognised by the 
health and safety training which they receive. Furthermore, they work under the direction of prison 
staff. Mrs Cox [the catering manager] was injured as a result of negligence by Mr Inder [the 
prisoner] in carrying on the activities assigned to him. The prison service is therefore vicariously 
liable to her. (Lord Reed at [32])
A further application of this approach by the Supreme Court came in Armes v Nottinghamshire County Council 
[2017]. Here the court held that the relationship between a local authority, responsible for children put into 
its care, and foster parents, into whose homes those children were placed, was akin to employment, such as to 
make the authority vicariously liable for abuse carried out by the foster parents.20 The court came to its 
decision by appealing to the five incidents identified in Christian Brothers and concluding that they were all 
present in the relationship between the authority and the foster parents. In particular, it held that the fact 
that the child was placed into a foster home in fulfilment of the authority’s duty towards children in its care, 
and that the authority recruited and trained foster carers and paid them allowances, meant that the foster 
parents played an ‘integral part of the local authority’s organisation of its child care services’ (at [60]). 
Moreover, while the authority did not micro-manage how the foster parents cared for the children, it 
nonetheless ‘exercised powers of approval, inspection, supervision and removal’, which gave it ‘a significant 
degree of control over both what the foster parents did and how they did it’ (at [62]).21
In Barclays Bank v Various Claimants [2020], the Supreme Court once again took the opportunity to provide 
guidance as when the relationship between the two parties is such that it ‘makes it proper for the law to make 
the one pay for the fault of the other’ (Lady Hale at [1]).
p. 617
20
21
20. Vicarious liability
Page 12 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Barclays Bank v Various Claimants [2020] UKSC 13 (SC)
The claimants were employees or prospective employees of Barclays and Barclays had arranged for 
them to have medical examinations with a Dr Bates. It was alleged that the doctor had, during these 
examinations, sexually assaulted the claimants, who sought to hold Barclays vicariously liable for 
those assaults. It was accepted that the doctor was not himself a Barclays employee but was instead an 
independent contractor. Nonetheless, the Court of Appeal had held that Barclays could be vicariously 
liable for his torts. The Supreme Court allowed Barclays’ appeal.
As Lord Reed had held in Cox, vicarious liability would attach where the tortfeasor’s activities were an 
integral part of the business activities carried on by the defendant but not where their activities were 
attributable to the conduct of a recognisably independent business of their own or of a third party. An 
independent contractor is, necessarily, one acting in the course of an independent business of their 
own. Dr Bates was never ‘anything close to’ an employee of Barclays.
He did, of course, do work for the Bank. The Bank made the arrangements for the 
examinations and sent him the forms to fill in. It therefore chose the questions to which it 
wanted answers. But the same would be true of many other people who did work for the 
Bank but were clearly independent contractors, ranging from the company hired to clean its 
windows to the auditors hired to audit its books … He was in business on his own account as 
a medical practitioner with a portfolio of patients and clients. One of those clients was the 
Bank. (Lady Hale at [28])
There is nothing, Lady Hale held,
in the trilogy of Supreme Court cases [Christian Brothers, Cox and Armes] … to suggest that 
the classic distinction between employment and relationships akin or analogous to 
employment, on the one hand, and the relationship with an independent contractor, on the 
other hand, has been eroded. … The question therefore is, as it has always been, whether the 
tortfeasor is carrying on business on his own account or whether he is in a relationship akin 
to employment with the defendant. (at [24])
The court also stressed that if it was clear that the tortfeasor was engaged in an independent business 
of their own, there was no need to consider the five incidents listed in the Christian Brothers case. 
Though ‘in doubtful cases’ these ‘may be helpful in identifying a relationship which is sufficiently 
analogous to employment to make it fair, just and reasonable to impose vicarious liability’ (Lady Hale 
at [27]).
p. 618
20. Vicarious liability
Page 13 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
While Barclays Bank sought to provide some much needed clarity as to the limitations of stage 1 of the test for 
vicarious liability, it is not yet clear how successful it has been. Certainly the lower courts have since adopted 
a much more restrictive approach to when parties are in a relationship ‘akin to employment’. In Blackpool FC 
v DSN [2021], the Court of Appeal found the club was not vicariously liable for the actions of an unpaid scout 
(overturning the lower court, decided before Barclays Bank). Similarly, in TVZ and others v Manchester City 
Football Club Ltd [2022], Johnson J, somewhat surprisingly, found that Manchester City 
↵
Football Club 
was not vicariously liable for the sexual abuse perpetrated over a number of years by a former football coach 
and ‘scout’.22 His precise role was in dispute, though it was common ground that he was never an employee 
of Manchester City. Johnson J held that his relationship with the defendant was not ‘akin to employment’ for 
a number of reasons, including that the footballing activities had been carried out voluntarily and in his spare 
time, that many of these were distinct and independent from Manchester City and that there was little 
evidence of the defendant having any control over his activities (at [309]–[320]):
It is deceptively easy to apply Lord Phillips’ incidents in a way that leads to a conclusion that it is fair, 
just and reasonable that MCFC [Manchester City Football Club] should be vicariously liable for the 
activities of Bennell. It is a big, well-resourced club. It could easily meet the liabilities to the 
claimants, at a fraction of the amount that it pays its star players. Bennell was connected to MCFC. 
That connection gave him the opportunity to commit grievous acts of abuse against young, 
innocent, and vulnerable boys. They have no real alternative remedy. However, that is not sufficient 
to meet the test for vicarious liability. It is not open to a court to impose vicarious liability on the 
basis of an intuitive feeling for where the justice of a case lies. Rather, it is necessary to apply the 
tightly controlled tests set down in the authorities, including the corrective guidance in Barclays 
Bank. (at [327])23
More recently, in BXB Lord Burrows returned to the ‘akin to employment’ test, summarising it as follows:
in applying the ‘akin to employment’ aspect of this test, a court needs to consider carefully features 
of the relationship that are similar to, or different from, a contract of employment. Depending on the 
facts, relevant features to consider may include: whether the work is being paid for in money or in 
kind, how integral to the organisation is the work carried out by the tortfeasor, the extent of the 
defendant’s control over the tortfeasor in carrying out the work, whether the work is being carried 
out for the defendant’s benefit or in furtherance of the aims of the organisation, what the situation is 
with regard to appointment and termination, and whether there is a hierarchy of seniority into 
which the relevant role fits. (at [58(ii)])24
Lord Burrows’ approach was followed by the Court of Appeal in MXX v A Secondary School [2023]. PXM, who 
was 18, had undertaken a week’s unpaid work experience at the school. During this time, he sexually 
assaulted the claimant, MXX, who was 13.25 While ultimately 
↵
the school was not vicariously liable for 
PXM’s abuse (there not being a sufficiently close connection between his torts and his employment as 
required by stage 2 of the test for vicarious liability),26 the court agreed that stage 1 was satisfied.
p. 619
22
23
24
25
p. 620
26
20. Vicarious liability
Page 14 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
It may be that the school did treat PXM’s request as a favour but … there need not be an alignment 
between the objectives of the defendant and the tortfeasor. The benefits of the relationship to each 
may be different. He was carrying out some of the work of the PE department … and was given 
responsibility for the same. Providing physical education classes to pupils at the school was a part of 
the National Curriculum and a part of the business of the school. In that business PXM played a role. 
The tasks carried out by PXM were for the benefit of the defendant as they released its staff thereby 
enabling them to spend time on other tasks or with pupils. They were also for the benefit of the 
pupils who learned sports skills. … I regard the fact that the defendant had to ensure that PXM was 
supervised by its staff at all times, and closely directed in any activity which he undertook with a 
pupil, as demonstrating that PXM was subject to the defendant’s close direction and control which is 
suggestive of an employment type relationship. It was one of the five incidents which Lady Hale 
identified as being helpful in doubtful cases. (Davies LJ at [66]–[68])27
The court also noted that PXM was ‘held out by the defendant as being akin to a member of staff such as a 
junior teacher or teaching assistant’ (at [70]).
Counterpoint
The Supreme Court in Barclays Bank confirmed the long-held position that an employer will not be 
vicariously liable for the torts of independent contractors. As Lord Sumption noted in Woodland v 
Essex County Council [2013], ‘the boundaries of vicarious liability have been expanded by recent 
decisions of the courts to embrace tortfeasors who are not employees of the defendant, but stand in a 
relationship which is sufficiently analogous to employment … [referencing Christian Brothers]. But it 
has never extended to the negligence of those who are truly independent contractors’ (at [3]).
A defendant may, however, be personally liable for harms resulting from the actions of an 
independent contractor where the defendant owes what is called a non-delegable duty of care. A non- 
delegable duty is, in simple terms, a duty not (simply) to take care but to see that care is taken. What 
this means is that, in cases of non-delegable duties of care, the defendant is unable to discharge their 
duty by (carefully) entrusting—delegating—responsibility for the discharge 
↵
of the duty to 
another. This means that should the person to whom the duty is owed be injured as a result of the 
carelessness of the person to whom the relevant task has been entrusted, the defendant will be in 
breach of their duty, notwithstanding that they have exercised reasonable care in the selection of 
their delegate. Non-delegable duties are owed by employers to their employees (discussed in Chapter 
13); however, they also arise in other contexts.28
In Woodland v Essex County Council [2013], the claimant, then aged 10, suffered a serious brain injury 
following an incident during a swimming lesson at a local pool, provided by professional swimming 
instructors employed by the school as independent contractors. Unable to rely on vicarious liability 
(the swimming instructors were not the school’s employees) and/or occupier’s liability (the school 
did not control the premises), it was argued that the school owed the claimant a non-delegable duty 
27
p. 621
28
20. Vicarious liability
Page 15 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
of care to ensure that reasonable care was taken of her not only by the school and its employees but 
also by any third party with which the school contracted to perform its educational functions. The 
Supreme Court unanimously agreed. Lord Sumption gave the leading judgment, in which he set out 
the circumstances in which a non-delegable duty will arise (at [22]–[23]) and justifications for the 
imposition of such duties (at [25]). Lady Hale gave a concurring judgment in which she drew the 
following analogy:
Consider the cases of three 10-year-old children, Amelia, Belinda and Clara. Amelia’s parents 
send her to a well-known and very expensive independent school. Swimming lessons are 
among the services offered and the school contracts with another school which has its own 
swimming pool to provide these. Belinda’s parents send her to a large school run by a local 
education authority which employs a large sports staff to service its schools, including 
swimming teachers and life-guards. Clara’s parents send her to a small state-funded faith 
school which contracts with an independent service provider to provide swimming lessons 
and life-guards for its pupils. All three children are injured during a swimming lesson as a 
result (it must be assumed) of the carelessness either of the swimming teachers or of the 
life-guards or of both. Would the man on the underground be perplexed to learn that Amelia 
and Belinda can each sue their own school for compensation but Clara cannot? …
As lawyers, we know that the three girls fall into three different legal categories. Amelia (we 
will assume) has the benefit of a contractual obligation of the school to secure that care be 
taken for her safety. Belinda has the benefit of the rule which makes an employer vicariously 
liable for the negligence of its employees. Clara has the benefit of neither and can only 
succeed if the school has an obligation to secure that care be taken for her safety …
The reason why the … school is liable is that … the school has undertaken to teach the pupil, 
and that responsibility is not discharged simply by choosing apparently competent people to 
do it. The … school remains personally responsible to see that care is taken in doing it. (at 
[30], [32], [34])
↵
The parties in Woodland returned to court in February 2015, almost 15 years after the accident, 
to determine the primary facts on which the negligence claim depended (Woodland v Maxwell and 
Essex County Council [2015]). The court held that both the swimming teacher and lifeguard had fallen 
below the standard of care expected of them and that, following the Supreme Court’s ruling, Essex 
County Council was, as a result, in breach of their non-delegable duty of care towards the claimant. 
Damages had reportedly been assessed earlier at £3 million. A later judgment found the lifeguard 
should contribute one-third to the third defendant’s liabilities to the claimant both in respect of 
damage and legal costs. Essex County Council did not seek a contribution from the swimming 
teacher, who was uninsured at the time of the accident (Woodland v Maxwell and Essex County Council 
(No 2) [2015]).29
p. 622
29
20. Vicarious liability
Page 16 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
It has been suggested that cases such as Lister and Christian Brothers would be better dealt with 
through the imposition of a non-delegable duty of care on the defendant.30 This has the advantage of 
recognising the particular social need—that is, increasing the protection of vulnerable parties in 
institutional care—without getting distracted by the various policy rationales of vicarious liability. 
However, moves in this direction seem unlikely. As Giliker notes,
the ‘akin to employment’ test continues to be interpreted generously in sexual abuse cases, 
then there is little incentive to argue for an extension to the non-delegable duty principle at 
least in this context. …, even for cases where it may now be more difficult to establish a 
relationship ‘akin to employment’, litigants will face an area of law that remains under- 
developed and inevitably lack of authority will discourage claims … At best, then, we can only 
say that the reining in of the relationship test might give encouragement to parties to raise 
non-delegable duties arguments, but it is hardly a game-changer.31
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-20-2>.
20.3  Stage 2: A close connection between the employer–employee rela­
tionship and the tortious wrongdoing of the employee
An employer cannot be vicariously liable unless their employee commits a tort. If they did not, there is 
nothing for their employer to be vicariously liable for.32 Over the years, while many cases have involved the 
tort of negligence, it is clear that an employer may also be 
↵
vicariously liable for an employee’s 
intentional acts including battery (Mattis v Pollock (t/a Flamingos Nightclub) [2003]), sexual assaults (Lister v 
Hesley Hall Ltd [2002], Christian Brothers), stealing (Morris v CW Martin [1966]; Brink’s Global Services Inc v 
Igrox Ltd [2009]), harassment (Majrowski v Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Trust [2006]) and misuse of private 
information (WM Morrison Supermarkets plc v Various Claimants [2020]).
Historically, an employer would only be vicariously liable for torts committed by an employee if the tort was 
committed ‘in the course’ or ‘within the scope’ of their employment. This too has been somewhat broadened 
in recent years. Traditionally when making assessments as to when an employee is acting in the course of 
their employment, the courts relied on the so-called ‘Salmond test’ which asked whether the employee’s act 
was ‘a wrongful and unauthorised mode of doing some act authorised by the master’.33 This test was rejected 
by the House of Lords in Lister in favour of a ‘close connection’ test.
30
31
32
p. 623
33
20. Vicarious liability
Page 17 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22 (HL)
Mr Grain was employed by Hesley Hall Ltd as the warden of a residential facility attached to a school, 
which specialised in teaching children with emotional and behavioural difficulties. Its purpose was to 
provide the children with a homely and caring setting—beyond and distinct from their school 
environment—in which to adjust to everyday living. The warden was responsible for the discipline 
and day-to-day running of the house. Over the course of four years he systematically sexually abused 
a number of boys, including the claimants.34 The claim that the defendants, the warden’s employers, 
were personally negligent in their care, selection and control of the warden was rejected at first 
instance and was not pursued further. The question for the House of Lords was whether they were 
vicariously liable for the warden’s acts of abuse.
A unanimous House of Lords held that the warden’s actions were ‘so closely connected’ with his 
employment that it would be fair and just to hold the employers vicariously liable. Though ‘sexual 
abuse is a particularly offensive and criminal act of personal gratification on the part of its perpetrator 
and therefore could be easily described as the paradigm of those acts which an employee could not 
conceivably be employed to do’ (at [53]), the sexual abuse in this case ‘was inextricably interwoven 
with the carrying out by the warden of his duties’ (Lord Steyn at [28]).
Pause for reflection
It has been suggested that ‘the facts in Lister shouted vicarious liability so loudly the outcome was 
obvious the moment the Lords freed themselves from the wooden reading of the Salmond test’.35 Do 
you agree? Would your answer differ if the defendant was a non-profit organisation or religious 
community rather than a commercial enterprise? Think again about 
↵
the justifications for the 
imposition of vicarious liability, particularly in relation to the allocation of risk. Is there a difference 
between a charity (which is not seeking to make a profit) and a company (which derives an economic 
benefit from their employee’s work and is more easily able to spread the loss through liability 
insurance or higher prices) bearing the risk of an employee’s deliberate wrongdoing?
The difficulty is that the ‘close connection’ test in Lister is easier to state than apply. As Giliker noted back in 
2002, it simply prompts a further question: how closely connected to their employment do the employee’s 
actions need to be?36 By 2012, Lord Phillips was of the view that the ‘test of “close connection” approved by all 
tells one nothing about the nature of the connection’ (Christian Brothers at [74]). Over a decade later in BXB, 
Lord Burrows adopted Lord Nicholls’ words in Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2002] to refer to the test as 
being inevitably ‘imprecise’ (at [33]).
34
35
p. 624
36
20. Vicarious liability
Page 18 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
In 2016, the question as to what amounts to a sufficiently close connection between the employee’s tort and 
their employment returned once again to the Supreme Court. In Mohamud v WM Morrison Supermarkets plc 
[2016], a petrol station attendant verbally and physically assaulted the claimant, who was of Somali origin, on 
the garage forecourt in a brutal racist and unprovoked attack.37 Finding his employer vicariously liable for his 
attack, Lord Toulson held that, applying Lister, the court had ‘in the simplest terms’ to consider two matters:
The first question is what functions or ‘field of activities’ have been entrusted by the employer to the 
employee, or, in everyday language, what was the nature of his job. … Secondly, the court must 
decide whether there was sufficient connection between the position in which he was employed and 
his wrongful conduct to make it right for the employer to be held liable under the principle of social 
justice. (at [44]–[45])
He concluded that the kiosk attendant’s actions amounted to a foul-mouthed and violent means of ensuring 
that the claimant left the premises, whether or not he was motivated by ‘personal racism rather than a desire 
to benefit his employer’s business’, which looked obviously to be the case (at [48]). Lord Toulson continued:
when … [he] followed the claimant back to his car and opened the front passenger door, he again 
told the claimant in threatening words that he was never to come back to the petrol station. This was 
not something personal between them; it was an order to keep away from his employer’s premises, 
which he reinforced by violence. In giving such an order he was 
↵
purporting to act about his 
employer’s business. It was a gross abuse of his position, but it was in connection with the business 
in which he was employed to serve customers. His employers entrusted him with that position and it 
is just that as between them and the claimant, they should be held responsible for their employee’s 
abuse of it. (at [47])
Mohamud was widely criticised for making the second stage of the test for vicarious liability too easy to 
satisfy.38 Unsurprisingly, then the stage 2 ‘connection’ test was considered again by the Supreme Court just 
four years later. In WM Morrison Supermarkets plc v Various Claimants [2020], the court took the opportunity, 
in the words of Lord Reed, to ‘address the misunderstandings which have arisen since its decision in the case 
of Mohamud’ (Lord Reed at [1]).
WM Morrison Supermarkets plc v Various Claimants [2020] UKSC 12 
(SC)
Skelton, a disgruntled Morrison’s employee, had been entrusted with payroll data which he was to 
submit to Morrison’s auditor. He did this, but also made a copy of the data which he then made 
publicly available on a file-sharing website, in breach of section 4(4) of the Data Protection Act 1998. 
The key question for the court was whether Skelton’s disclosure of the date ‘was so closely connected 
37
p. 625
38
20. Vicarious liability
Page 19 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
with acts he was authorised to do that, for the purposes of the liability of his employer to third parties, 
[it] may fairly and properly be regarded as done by him while acting in the ordinary course of his 
employment’ (at [32]).
While Skelton’s leak of the data could be said to have been the culmination of a sequence of events 
starting with his receiving this data in his capacity as a Morrison’s employee, the court considered 
that his torts were nonetheless not committed in the course of that employment. In answering this 
question, and contrary to the suggestion of Lord Toulson in Mohamud, the tortfeasor’s motives—in 
the sense of whether he was doing his employer’s business or acting for his own personal reasons— 
was an important consideration: ‘it is abundantly clear that Skelton was not engaged in furthering his 
employer’s business when he committed the wrongdoing in question. On the contrary, he was 
pursuing a personal vendetta, seeking vengeance for the disciplinary proceedings some months 
earlier’ (at [47]).
The court also confirmed that Lord Phillips’s five ‘incidents’ were only relevant to stage 1 of the test 
for vicarious liability, that is when determining whether the relationship between the tortfeasor and 
defendant is ‘akin to employment’, with an exception for sexual abuse cases where a ‘more tailored’ 
version of the ‘close connection test’ is needed (Lord Reed at [31], [23]).
Pause for reflection
While the claim for vicarious liability failed in WM Morrison, it nonetheless makes clear that the fact 
than an employee is engaged in intentional wrongdoing will not necessarily mean they are acting 
outside the course of their employment. In Rose v Plenty [1976], for example, despite strict 
instructions to the contrary, a milkman allowed a boy to help him deliver the milk and to 
↵
accompany him on his rounds. The milkman’s employer was held vicariously liable for injuries 
the boy suffered when he fell from the milk float as a result of the milkman’s negligent driving. 
Similarly, in Lister Lord Millett was clear that:
It is no answer to say that the employee was guilty of intentional wrongdoing, or that his act 
was not merely tortious but criminal, or that he was acting exclusively for his own benefit, or 
that he was acting contrary to express instructions, or that his conduct was the very 
negation of his employer’s duty. (at [79])
And so an employer may instruct their employee to take reasonable care or not do a specific 
intentional act, but if the employee nonetheless goes on to do the very thing they have been told not 
to do (and this amounts to a tort), the employer cannot rely on the argument that, far from doing 
their job, the employee was doing the very thing they had been instructed not to do.
p. 626
20. Vicarious liability
Page 20 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
In Wendall v Barchester Healthcare Ltd; Wallbank v Wallbank Fox Designs Ltd [2012] the Court of Appeal 
heard two cases falling either side of the line. In Wendall, the employer was not liable for an 
employee’s unprovoked, very violent—and criminal—reaction39 to a colleague’s perfectly reasonable 
query as to whether he might work an extra shift, while in Wallbank the employer was vicariously 
liable for the actions of an employee who was ‘not a wholly satisfactory employee’ and who had 
assaulted the claimant, his manager, after being told to ‘come on’ (that is, to speed up) when loading 
metal frames into an oven. The employee reacted by throwing him 12 feet across the room.40 Pill LJ 
observed:
The possibility of friction is inherent in any employment relationship but particularly one in 
a factory, even a small factory, where instant instructions and quick reactions are required. 
Frustrations which lead to a reaction involving some violence are predictable. The risk of an 
over-robust reaction to an instruction is a risk created by the employment. It may be 
reasonably incidental to the employment rather than unrelated to or independent of it. (at 
[57])
More recently in Levitt v Euro Building and Maintenance Contractors Ltd [2019], the employer was 
vicariously liable for the actions of an employee who hit another on the back of the head with a 
scaffolding pole during the course of a fight.41 The violent act was ‘the end point, in an unbroken 
series of events which emanated from the original argument on the scaffolding concerning the work 
or work materials’ (at [88]).
Do you think this is fair on employers? While it would clearly defeat the purpose of vicarious liability 
if the fact that conduct was prohibited by the employer meant that the employee’s action would 
automatically fall outside the course of their employment—few employers explicitly authorise the 
commission of torts by their employees; in fact most do quite the opposite—if an employer has done 
all they could reasonably be expected to do, is making them vicariously liable for their employee’s 
(prohibited) actions justified?
↵
Despite taking a stricter view on the close connection test, the Supreme Court in WM Morrison went to 
great lengths to support Lord Toulson’s judgment in Mohamud. Lord Reed was clear that:
39
40
41
p. 627
20. Vicarious liability
Page 21 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Lord Toulson’s judgment was not intended to effect a change in the law of vicarious liability: quite 
the contrary. That becomes clear if the judgment is read as a whole, as I shall explain. The judgments 
below focused on the final paragraphs, in which Lord Toulson summarised long-established 
principles in the simplest terms and applied them to the facts of the case then before the court. A few 
phrases in those paragraphs, taken out of context, were treated as establishing legal principles: 
principles which would represent a departure from the precedents which Lord Toulson was 
expressly following … Lord Toulson was not suggesting any departure from the approach adopted in 
Lister and Dubai Aluminium. His position was the exact opposite. Nor was he suggesting that all that 
was involved in determining whether an employer was vicariously liable was for the court to 
consider whether there was a temporal or causal connection between the employment and the 
wrongdoing, and whether it was right for the employer to be held liable as a matter of social justice. 
Plainly, the close connection test is not merely a question of timing or causation, and … vicarious 
liability for wrongdoing by an employee is not determined according to individual judges’ sense of 
social justice. (at [17], [26])
Mohamud was not, Lord Reed suggested, wrongly decided, just misunderstood.42 However, it is certainly the 
case that the ‘restatement’ in WM Morrison of the second stage test as requiring a ‘close connection’ is a 
return to the narrower formulation of the test found in Lister and Dubai Aluminium, in contrast to Lord 
Toulson’s broader formulation in Mohamud.
Pause for reflection
While the Supreme Court’s decision in WM Morrison was ‘welcomed by many as a sign that the Court 
is ready to apply the brakes to [an] area’ that has been on the move for some time,43 Giliker argues 
that in its attempt to ‘calm the waters disturbed by the (perceived) approach of Lord Toulson’ and 
resolve the ‘misunderstandings’ in Mohamud,44 Lord Reed’s judgment created even more confusion. 
Not least the suggestion that sexual abuse cases should be treated as a separate category of claims. 
More fundamentally, she continues:
42
43
44
20. Vicarious liability
Page 22 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The Supreme Court, despite its lack of citation of commentary, was clearly aware of criticism 
that the Toulson simplified test [in Mohamud] was too generous and that the lower courts 
were interpreting the connection test extremely liberally … To respond to such concerns on 
the basis they represent a ‘misunderstanding’ of the law and derive in part from reading 
judgments out of context represents a matter of concern. As common lawyers, we rely on our 
apex courts for guidance. We are taught at an early age to identify the ratio decidendi of a case 
and to construe precedent carefully. … If a Court can simply argue at a later date that its 
express words have been misunderstood and 
↵
taken out of context, then there is a 
danger that this relationship of trust will be detrimentally affected. It creates uncertainty in 
the law and encourages legal challenge. … objectively, it is misleading to suggest that [WM] 
Morrison merely explains Mohamud to a confused audience. It changes the law. The reality is 
that Mohamud represented a false step in the law. It should therefore have been overturned 
in favour of a more traditional interpretation of the ‘close connection’ test. It may be argued 
that this, de facto, is what the Supreme Court has achieved, albeit in a more subtle and tactful 
fashion without the embarrassment of formally overturning its previous decision. I have no 
doubt that this is the intention of the Court. Subtlety and tact, however, come at a price.45
A price at least part of which appears to be yet another case on vicarious liability reaching the 
Supreme Court just three years later: Trustees of the Barry Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses v BXB 
[2023].
Trustees of the Barry Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses v BXB [2023] 
UKSC 15 (SC)
The claimant met Mark Sewell and his wife, Mary, and their children in 1984 after she began 
attending the services of the Barry Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The families were close, and 
Mrs B considered Mark Sewell, who was an elder at the Church, to be her best friend. Towards the end 
of 1989, Mark Sewell’s behaviour changed. He began drinking heavily and appeared depressed. He 
began flirting with Mrs B, including hugging and kissing her and holding her hand, and on one 
occasion asked her to run away with him. Mrs B spoke to Mark Sewell’s father, who was also an elder 
at the Church, who explained that Mark Sewell was suffering from depression and needed love and 
support. It was accepted that had it not been for this advice, and the fact that Mark Sewell was an 
elder, the friendship would have ended. A few months later, after a morning spent evangelising and a 
pub lunch with the families, Mr and Mrs B returned to the Sewells’ home. Mary Sewell asked Mrs B to 
see if she could convince Mark Sewell to talk to the elders about his depression. Mrs B went into a 
back room to speak to Mark Sewell, where upon he pushed her to the floor and raped her.46
p. 628
45
46
20. Vicarious liability
Page 23 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The question for the court was whether the Jehovah’s Witness organisation was vicariously liable for 
Mark Sewell’s actions. The Supreme Court held that it was not.47
While the relationship between the Jehovah’s Witness organisation and Mark Sewell was one akin to 
employment,48 applying a (slightly revised) close connection test—that is, ‘whether the wrongful 
conduct was so closely connected with acts that the tortfeasor was authorised to do that it can fairly 
and properly be regarded as done by the tortfeasor while acting in the course 
↵
of the tortfeasor’s 
employment or quasi-employment’ (at [58](iii)49)—Lord Burrows concluded that the rape was not 
sufficiently closely connected to his quasi-employment as an elder. He pointed to the following 
factors:
[(i)] the rape was not committed while Mark Sewell was carrying out any activities as an 
elder on behalf of the Jehovah’s Witnesses … [(ii)] at the time of the rape, Mark Sewell was 
not exercising control over Mrs B because of his position as an elder … [T]he primary reason 
that the rape took place was not because Mark Sewell was abusing his position as an elder 
but because he was abusing his position as a close friend of Mrs B when she was trying to 
help him … [(iii) it is not realistic to argue that Mark Sewell was] wearing his metaphorical 
uniform as an elder at the time the tort was committed … [(iv) while] Mark Sewell’s role as 
an elder was a ‘but for’ cause of Mrs B’s continued friendship with Mark Sewell and hence of 
her being with him in the back room where the rape occurred … ‘but for’ causation is 
insufficient to satisfy the close connection test [(v)] the violent and appalling rape was not 
an objectively obvious progression from what had gone before but was rather a shocking 
one-off attack … [(vi) finally,] the role played by Tony Sewell [Mark Sewell’s father] or the 
fact that inappropriate kissing on the lips with female members of the congregation when 
welcoming them was not condemned [is of] no relevance, except as background. (at [73]– 
[79])
As a ‘final check’, Lord Burrows continued:
if I stand back and consider the policy of enterprise liability or risk that may be said to 
underpin vicarious liability … that consideration of policy confirms that there is no 
convincing justification for the Jehovah’s Witness organisation to bear the cost or risk of the 
rape committed by Mark Sewell. Clearly the Jehovah’s Witness organisation has deeper 
pockets than Mark Sewell. But that is not a justification for extending vicarious liability 
beyond its principled boundaries. (at [82])
The court also confirmed that there was no ‘tailored test for’ sexual abuse cases:50 ‘The idea that the 
law still needs tailoring to deal with sexual abuse cases is misleading. The necessary tailoring is 
already reflected in, and embraced by, the modern tests’ (at [58](v)).
47
48
p. 629
49
50
20. Vicarious liability
Page 24 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
In making clear that cases involving sexual abuse should not be treated as a separate category of 
claims, Lord Burrows was seeking to resolve ongoing uncertainty around the application of the close 
connection test in sexual abuse cases (after Lord Reed had suggested in 
↵
WM Morrison that ‘a 
more tailored version’ of the test applied in such cases (at [36])). However, Jeremy Letwin and 
William Peck argue that Lord Burrows’ decision to draw ‘together recent case law into a grand unified 
theory of the “close connection” test’, in fact, creates more uncertainty in this context (as well as in 
relation to its application more generally).51
In particular, they point to the categorisation of Mark Sewell’s rape of Mrs B as a ‘one-off attack’ (at 
[78])—despite the fact he had made earlier inappropriate sexual advances towards Mrs B and others 
in the congregation—and the suggestion that he was not at the time wearing his ‘metaphorical 
uniform’ as an elder (at [76]) but rather acting as a close friend. Not only had Mrs B and her family 
spent the morning before the rape took place involved in religious activity with Mr and Mrs Sewell, 
but also the place where the rape took place was regularly used for religious study. Moreover, it was 
not obvious that Mrs B was at Mr Sewell’s house because they were ‘close friends’—in fact, quite the 
opposite: she had been told to maintain the friendship by another elder in the church. Lord Burrows’ 
recognition that Mark Sewell’s role as an elder was recognised as ‘a but for’ cause of the rape (at [77]) 
underlines this.
Lord Burrows’ approach can be contrasted with that of Davies LJ who, in the leading judgment in BXB 
in the Court of Appeal, suggested that ‘in cases of this kind, the test is more open textured and 
requires an analysis of all aspects of the relationship between the tort and the abuser’s status’ (at 
[83]). She continued:
p. 630
51
20. Vicarious liability
Page 25 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Contained within the tailored test in cases of sexual abuse is the concept of the conferral of 
authority upon the tortfeasor by the defendant. … The issue is the connection between the 
abuse and the relationship between the tortfeasor and the defendant. … On the facts of this 
claim, what is relevant for the purpose of the close connection test is the conferral of 
authority by the Jehovah’s Witness organisation upon its elders, coupled with the 
opportunity for physical proximity as between an elder and publishers in the congregation. 
… Mark Sewell’s status as an elder was one factor in the couple’s developing relationship and 
that Mrs B tolerated Mark Sewell’s inappropriate behaviour towards her because Mark 
Sewell was an elder, which meant that she assumed he would be acting from pure motives 
and that there could be repercussions if she were to call out his inappropriate behaviour … Of 
particular note is the [trial] judge’s identification of Mark Sewell’s perception of the 
significance of his status as an elder, reflected in his response when confronted by Mrs B 
about his sexual abuse of CXC [a 14-year-old girl who was also a member of the 
congregation], namely that ‘he told us he could do what he liked because he was an elder and 
that he was not answerable to us’. … Quite simply, had Mrs B felt able to end the friendship at 
an earlier time, Mark Sewell would not have been able to continue his close proximity to Mrs 
B and she would not have felt compelled to tolerate his increasingly inappropriate and 
unbearable behaviour because he was an elder. (at [84]–[87])
Letwin and Peck argue that though Lord Burrow’s ‘presents the Supreme Court’s judgment as a mere 
restatement of well-established principles … In reality, however, the judgment is highly innovative’.52 
Whose view do you find most persuasive?
↵
So where does this leave us? Giliker is clear: ‘While … the UKSC seems resolute not to overturn 
Mohamud, its precedential value is now premised on a very narrow reading of the case … BXB amounts to a 
further attempt by the UKSC to slow down the momentum of vicarious liability and reinstate guiding 
principles to provide greater certainty and predictability to the law’.53 Whether it succeeds in its aim remains 
to be seen.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-20-3>.
20.4  Conclusion
The doctrine of vicarious liability imposes liability on the employer without fault on the part of the employer. 
It has been one of the most uncertain areas of tort law in recent years. The two-stage test, while easy to state 
—an employer will be vicariously liable for the actions of their employee, or someone who is in a relationship 
‘akin’ to employment, where there is a close connection between this relationship and the tortious 
52 
p. 631
53
20. Vicarious liability
Page 26 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
2
→
→
→
→
wrongdoing of the employee—has proven far harder to apply. Despite the Supreme Court’s attempt in 
Barclays Bank and WM Morrison and now BXB to clarify the approach to be taken, it seems likely that this 
uncertainty will continue for some time yet.
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
In what circumstances will an employer be liable for the actions of an employee? How far, if at all, should this 
extend to cover things that the employee has been expressly forbidden by the employer to do?
How, if at all, can the imposition of vicarious liability on a blameless employer be justified?
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-20-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Answering the problem question
Consider again the problem question at the start of this chapter. Now having read about the topic, what 
would be your advice to the various parties?
Here are some pointers to get you started:
In order for Mario to be liable for Tadhg’s actions you should establish that he is an employee (you are told 
he is), that he has committed a tort (hitting Qiang over the head is a battery) and that this is in the course of 
his employment. This latter aspect is the most controversial but is likely—on recent case law—to be 
established.
In contrast, the claim in respect of Cadbury Blacker’s actions will turn on whether she is an employee or in 
a relationship akin to employment and whether she has committed a tort (i.e. whether she has been negligent 
in failing to tape the lead down).
If you need some more guidance:
See the annotated version of the problem with issues and cases to consider <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-20-annotated- 
problem-question-interactive>.
Check your answer against the suggested outline answer <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-20-answers-to-problem-question>.
20. Vicarious liability
Page 27 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Further reading
The best place to start your further reading is with Paula Giliker’s 2021 article which considers the decisions in 
Barclays Bank and WM Morrison.
Bell, Andrew J ‘Plus ça change, plus c’est la Vicarious Liability’ (2020) 36 Journal of Professional Negligence 150
Giliker, Paula ‘Can the Supreme Court Halt the Ongoing Expansion of Vicarious Liability: Barclays and Morrison in the 
UK Supreme Court?’ (2021) 37 Tottel’s Journal of Professional Negligence 55
Giliker, Paula ‘Vicarious Liability in the UK Supreme Court and High Court of Australia: Trustees of the Barry 
Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses v BXB [2023] UKSC 15; CCIG Investments Pty Ltd v Schokman [2023] HCA 21’ (2024) 
44 Legal Studies 191
Letwin, Jeremy and William Peck ‘A Grand Unified Theory for the “Close Connection Test” in Vicarious Liability 
Cases’ [2023] Cambridge Law Journal 388
Morgan, Phillip ‘Vicarious Liability on the Move’ (2013) 129 Law Quarterly Review 139
Morgan, Phillip ‘Certainty in Vicarious Liability: A Quest for a Chimaera?’ [2016] Cambridge Law Journal 202
Nolan, Donal ‘Reining in Vicarious Liability’ [2020] Industrial Law Journal 609
Stevens, Robert ‘Non-Delegable Duties and Vicarious Liability’ in Jason Neyers, Erika Chamberlain and Stephen Pitel 
(eds) Emerging Issues in Tort Law (Hart 2007)
Todd, Paul ‘Vicarious Liability on the Move But Where Should it Stop?’ (2020) 7(1) Journal of International and 
Comparative Law 1
Williams, Glanville ‘Liability for Independent Contractors’ [1956] Cambridge Law Journal 180
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-20-web-links?options=showName>.
Notes
 
1. A number of cases in this chapter involve discussions of physical and sexual abuse, including rape and child abuse. 
Please be aware of this as you read the judgments and surrounding commentary. Do take a break and seek support 
from someone you trust if you need to.
 
2. See further Chapter 13.
 
3. As we shall see, there has recently been a significant expansion of vicarious liability beyond employment 
relationships to other relationships which are, in the relevant sense, akin to employment. Nonetheless, for simplicity, 
in this chapter we will refer to the defendant as ‘the employer’ and the tortfeasor as ‘the employee’.
 
4. Paula Giliker ‘Can the Supreme Court Halt the Ongoing Expansion of Vicarious Liability: Barclays and Morrison in the 
UK Supreme Court?’ (2021) 37 Tottel’s Journal of Professional Negligence 55, 55.
p. 632
1.
2.
3.
4.
20. Vicarious liability
Page 28 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
5. See e.g. Lord Nicholls in Majrowski v Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Trust [2006] at [9].
 
6. See further Lord Phillips in Christian Brothers at [34]–[35] (discussed in section 20.2) and Lord Reed in Cox v Ministry 
of Justice [2016] at [19]–[24].
 
7. Glanville Williams ‘Liability for Independent Contractors’ [1956] Cambridge Law Journal 180.
 
8. John Bell ‘The Basis of Vicarious Liability’ [2013] Cambridge Law Journal 17, 18.
 
9. John Fleming The Law of Torts (9th edn LBC Information Services 1998) 410.
 
10. In Christian Brothers, Lord Phillips combined the second and third justifications to suggest that ‘[v]icarious liability 
is imposed where a defendant, whose relationship with the abuser put it in a position to use the abuser to carry on its 
business or to further its own interests, has done so in a manner which has created or significantly enhanced the risk 
that the victim or victims would suffer the relevant abuse’ (at [86]) (see further Bell n8).
 
11. Robert Stevens Torts and Rights (OUP 2007) 257–74.
 
12. See further Pimlico Plumbers Ltd v Smith [2018], Uber BV and others v Aslam and others [2021] and Commissioners for 
His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs v Professional Game Match Officials Ltd [2024] for examples as to how the Supreme 
Court has determined employment status in other contexts.
 
13. Ewan McKendrick ‘Vicarious Liability and Independent Contractors—A Re-Examination’ (1990) 53 Modern Law 
Review 770, 770.
 
14. It also used to be the case that an employee could not have more than one employer (for the purposes of vicarious 
liability) (Laugher v Pointer [1826]). However, attitudes towards the possibility of liability of multiple parties have 
changed and this view has now been rejected by the Court of Appeal in Viasystems (Tyneside) Ltd v Thermal Transfer 
(Northern) Ltd and others [2005] where two different employers were held vicariously liable for the negligence of a 
fitter’s mate who caused a flood in a factory.
 
15. In 1990, the school’s headmaster, Brother James, was expelled from the Institute after it was discovered that he 
had systematically sexually abused boys in his care over a 20-year period. He was later convicted of numerous serious 
sexual offences against the boys at the school. The school closed in 1994.
 
16. Historically, dual vicarious liability was not permitted: an employee ‘is the servant of one or the other, but not the 
servant of one and the other; the law does not recognise several liability in two principals who are 
unconnected’ (Laugher v Pointer [1826]).
 
17. This case was the first to consider the essential elements of the employer–employee relationship (stage 1) in the 
context of allegations of sexual abuse against Roman Catholic priests. This had been conceded in previous cases. See 
further Janet O’Sullivan ‘The Sins of the Father—Vicarious Liability Extended’ [2012] Cambridge Law Journal 485.
 
18. Bell n8 20.
 
19. Blackpool FC v DSN [2021]; TVZ and others v Manchester City Football Club Ltd [2022] discussed later in section 20.2. 
See also Joshua Rozenberg, ‘Analysis: Jimmy Savile and the complex question of victim compensation’ The Guardian 
26 February 2015 and, more recently, Harrods’ acceptance of vicarious liability in relation to the allegations of serious 
sexual abuse by Mohamed Al Fayed (Bianca Castro ‘Harrods to face civil claims over allegations of rape and sexual 
assault by former boss Mohamed Al Fayed’ Law Society Gazette 20 September 2024).
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20. Vicarious liability
Page 29 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
20. Armes left open the possibility of whether a local authority can be vicariously liable for torts committed against a 
child by a foster carer who is related to the child. This was considered by the Court of Appeal in DJ v Barnsley 
Metropolitan District Council [2024]. DJ was fostered by his aunt and uncle, Mrs and Mr G. Some years later, DJ alleged 
he had been regularly sexually assaulted by Mr G. While the court found on the facts that the relationship between the 
council and Mr G was one akin to employment (and that the council were vicariously liable for Mr G’s actions), it was 
keen to stress that it was ‘not laying down a general rule that a local authority will always be vicariously liable for torts 
committed by foster carers who are related to the child’ and made no ruling on the position in relation to liability 
under the present legislation (at [69]).
 
21. The Supreme Court refused to find that the local authority owed a non-delegable duty of care to the claimant, on 
the basis that such a duty would come into conflict with the authority’s duty to act in the best interests of children in 
its care. The child’s best interests would sometimes require allowing them to stay with their families or friends. Yet, if 
the authority was to be liable for the tortious acts of those family members and friends, its own interest in avoiding 
liability would steer it away from allowing the children to stay with them. See further Simon Deakin ‘Organisational 
Torts: Vicarious Liability versus Non-Delegable Duty’ [2018] Cambridge Law Journal 15.
 
22. Barry Benell was a football coach and scout during the 1970s and 1980s. He is currently serving a 34-year jail term 
after being convicted on five separate occasions of child sexual abuse offences against 22 boys. In 2019, Manchester 
City, whilst denying liability for the abuse committed, set up the ‘Manchester City FC Survivors’ Scheme’ to offer 
compensation, counselling and personal apologies to survivors as ‘an alternative to often lengthy, costly and arduous 
litigation processes’ (Statement from Manchester City FC Board of Directors, 17 March 2021).
 
23. The judge also held that it was not equitable to disapply the limitation period (at [570]). The claimants have 
indicated that they intend to appeal.
 
24. It is worth noting, Giliker suggests, the ‘greater reference’ placed by Lord Burrows:
to the characteristics of a contract of employment (eg remuneration; appointment/termination provisions). 
There is, unlike [Lord Phillips in Christian Brothers], no reference to the deeper pocket argument nor any 
mention of enterprise risk. These factors self-evidently favour practical resemblances to the contract of 
employment over policy. (Paula Giliker ‘Vicarious Liability in the UK Supreme Court and High Court of 
Australia: Trustees of the Barry Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses v BXB [2023] UKSC 15; CCIG 
Investments Pty Ltd v Schokman [2023] HCA 21’ (2024) 44 Legal Studies 191, 194)
 
25. He later pleaded guilty to sexual activity with a child.
 
26. Davies LJ continued:
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
20. Vicarious liability
Page 30 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
He had no caring or pastoral responsibility for the pupils … PXM’s access to the claimant at school was 
limited as he was, or should have been, kept under close supervision at all times. Even allowing for the fact 
that PXM was to be addressed as if he was a member of staff, he held no position of authority over the pupils 
in the school. It was not until PXM left the school that any communication took place on Facebook and such 
communication was specifically prohibited by the school. … [G]iven the limited nature of PXM’s role during 
the course of one week, the facts do not begin to satisfy the requirements of the close connection test. The 
grooming which led to the sexual offending was not inextricably woven with the carrying out by PXM of his 
work during his week at the defendant’s school such that it would be fair and just to hold the defendant 
vicariously liable for the acts of PXM. (at [87]–[88])
 
27. Unusually, the Court of Appeal also overturned a number of findings of fact of the trial judge.
 
28. See e.g. Hopkins (A Child) v Akramy [2020] where the court held that the Primary Care Trust did not owe a non- 
delegable duty of care to protect NHS patients from harm, including harm from the negligent provision of primary 
medical services by a third party. Where a statute provides that a duty is delegable, the common law cannot override it 
(at [74]). The court drew a distinction between situations where there was a duty to provide care personally (as in 
Woodland) which is non-delegable and a duty to arrange for services to be provided (as in Myton v Woods [1980] and as 
was the case here) in which there is no common law non-delegable duty of care.
 
29. In Armes v Nottinghamshire County Council [2017], the Supreme Court refused to find that a local authority owed a 
non-delegable duty of care to the claimant, who was physically and emotionally abused by two sets of foster parents, 
with whom the authority placed her. The court concluded that such a duty would come into conflict with the 
authority’s duty to act in the best interests of children in its care. The child’s best interests would sometimes require 
allowing them to stay with their families or friends. Yet, if the authority was to be liable for the tortious acts of those 
family members and friends, its own interest in avoiding liability would steer it away from allowing the children to stay 
with them.
 
30. See e.g. Paul Todd ‘Vicarious Liability on the Move But Where Should it Stop?’ (2020) 7 Journal of International and 
Comparative Law 1; Simon Deakin ‘Organisational Torts: Vicarious Liability versus Non-Delegable Duty’ [2018] 
Cambridge Law Journal 15; John Murphy ‘Juridical Foundations of Common Law Non-Delegable Duties’ in Jason 
Neyers, Erika Chamberlain and Stephen Pitel (eds) Emerging Issues in Tort Law (Hart 2007).
 
31. Giliker n4 70–1.
 
32. Although see Robert Stevens ‘Vicarious Liability or Vicarious Actions’ (2007) 123 Law Quarterly Review 30.
 
33. JW Salmond Law of Torts (1907); now in Salmond & Heuston on the Law of Torts (21st edn Sweet & Maxwell 1996) 
443. See e.g. the Court of Appeal decision in Trotman v North Yorkshire County Council [1999] in which the court refused 
to find the employers of a school teacher who sexually abused a pupil vicariously liable because the abuse was not an 
unauthorised mode of carrying out an authorised act. Trotman was overruled by the House of Lords in Lister.
 
34. He was subsequently sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment for multiple offences involving sexual abuse.
 
35. Bruce Feldthusen ‘Vicarious Liability for Sexual Abuse’ (2001) 9 Tort Law Review 173, 177.
 
36. Paula Giliker ‘Rough Justice in an Unjust World’ (2002) 65 Modern Law Review 269. Compare e.g. Weir v Chief 
Constable of Merseyside Police [2003]—in which an off-duty police officer was found to be acting in the course of his 
employment when he assaulted a young man he found rummaging through his girlfriend’s things by throwing him 
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
20. Vicarious liability
Page 31 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
down some stairs and locking him in the police van which he had borrowed to help his girlfriend move flat—with N v 
Chief Constable of Merseyside Police [2006]—in which a police officer who wore his police uniform to go ‘on the prowl’ 
for vulnerable young women, who he later raped and indecently assaulted, was held not to be acting in the course of 
his employment.
 
37. This case was heard alongside Cox v Ministry of Justice. As Lord Reed explains: ‘The judgments are separate because 
the claims and issues are separate, but they are intended to be complementary to each other in their legal analysis’ (at 
[1]).
 
38. See Giliker n4 62. See also criticism by the High Court of Australia in Prince Alfred College v ADC [2016].
 
39. He was subsequently sentenced to 15 months’ imprisonment.
 
40. He was convicted of inflicting GBH and ordered to pay £600 compensation.
 
41. He was subsequently convicted of GBH and sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment.
 
42. Giliker n4 64.
 
43. Andrew J Bell ‘Plus ça change, plus c’est la Vicarious Liability’ (2020) 36 Journal of Professional Negligence 150, 150.
 
44. ibid 154.
 
45. Giliker n4 67–8.
 
46. Mark Sewell was later convicted of raping Mrs B and seven counts of indecently assaulting two other individuals.
 
47. Mrs B had been successful at trial and in the Court of Appeal and had been awarded £62,000.
 
48. By virtue of the fact that ‘as an elder Mark Sewell was carrying out work on behalf of, and assigned to him by, the 
Jehovah’s Witness organisation; that he was performing duties which were in furtherance of, and integral to, the aims 
and objectives of the Jehovah’s Witness organisation; that there was an appointments process to be made an elder 
and a process by which a person could be removed as an elder; and that there was a hierarchical structure into which 
the role of an elder fitted’ (Lord Burrows at [66]).
 
49. Both ‘minor adjustments’ were aimed at ensuring the test was comprehensive—the reference to quasi-employment 
to ensure the inclusion of relationships ‘akin to employment’ and the removal the ‘superfluous and potentially 
misleading’ word ‘ordinary’ before employment to ensure the inclusion of sexual abuse cases, which could not ‘easily 
be said to fall within the “ordinary” course of employment’ (at [58](iii)).
 
50. As applied by the Court of Appeal, where Davies LJ giving the leading judgment suggested that ‘in cases of this kind, 
the test is more open textured and requires an analysis of all aspects of the relationship between the tort and the 
abuser’s status’ (at [83]).
 
51. Jeremy Letwin and William Peck ‘A Grand Unified Theory for the “Close Connection Test” in Vicarious Liability 
Cases’ [2023] Cambridge Law Journal 388.
 
52. ibid 388.
 
53. Giliker n24 194–5.
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
20. Vicarious liability
Page 32 of 32
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
