17. Defamation
Page 1 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tort Law (9th edn)
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
17. Defamation
Kirsty Horsey and Erika Rackley
https://doi.org/10.1093/he/9780198925231.003.0017
Published in print: 15 August 2025
Published online: August 2025
Abstract
This chapter discusses the tort of defamation. This area of law has undergone significant legislative change following the 
enactment of the Defamation Act 2013. The chapter considers the elements to a claim in defamation and key defences, 
including honest opinion, publication on a matter of public interest and privilege (where the statement is made in the 
performance of a duty). Remedies include an injunction to prevent publication, and a permanent injunction to prevent further 
publication and damages.
Keywords: 
tort law, Defamation Act 2013, libel, slander, defences, remedies
Problem question
Read this problem question carefully and keep it in mind while you are working through the 
chapter that follows. At the end of the chapter you will be able to apply what you have learnt to the 
problem question and advise the relevant parties.
The latest edition of The Horsechester News, the student newspaper, arrives on the Horsechester 
University campus. The front-page headline is ‘Suspected sex offender caught!’ To one side of the 
headline is a large photo of Maverick, a senior law professor at Horsechester University. In fact, 
Maverick is not the suspect described in the headline, as the detail of the story makes clear, and his 
photo is on the front page only because there is a lengthy interview with him inside the newspaper. 
But a number of students see the headline and picture without reading the story and think that the 
headline refers to Maverick.
p. 481
17. Defamation
Page 2 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
→
→
→
→
→
On seeing the headline, Kit messages her tort law WhatsApp group ‘Why is Top Gun trending? 
*Innocent face*’.1 The group has 130 members.
In the interview published in the newspaper, Maverick reflects on his career. He recounts how Bruno, 
the head of the law department when he first joined Horsechester University, ‘was an outstanding 
scholar, which is all the more remarkable considering that he seemed to be drunk half the time’. 
Maverick is less complimentary about some of his colleagues: ‘the lecturers appointed in the 1990s 
were, without exception, unequivocally useless’. Raya, one of the ten law lecturers appointed in the 
1990s, is unhappy about how this comment reflects on her.
Discuss any possible claims that may be brought by Maverick, Bruno, Kit and Raya.
17.1  Introduction
Consider the following examples:
A national newspaper suggests that a well-known public figure has ‘cynically’ tried to manipulate 
public opinion following a very public falling out with his family.
A newly married TV presenter is revealed live on-air by her co-presenter as having had an affair with 
her dance partner while filming a TV show.
A TV ‘self-help’ guru is accused of plagiarism.
The CEO of a multinational company is ‘exposed’ as engaging in sadomasochistic sexual activities with 
allegedly fascist overtones.
A presenter on BBC Radio 5’s Test Match Special accuses an England cricketer of fixing matches in 
return for significant sums of money.
In each of these examples there is a potential claim in the tort of defamation. In contrast with, say, the torts of 
trespass to the person and negligence, which protect an individual’s bodily or physical integrity, defamation 
protects a person’s reputation. The law of defamation enables an individual (or, more controversially, a 
company) to prevent the publication of, or recover damages for, public statements which make, or are likely 
to make, people think less of them. As such, many of the cases involve people in the public eye—celebrities, 
politicians and so on—and/or multinational corporations who are inevitably not only more aware of, but 
perhaps have a greater interest in, what other people think of them. However, defamation is not a tort 
exclusively for the rich and famous—we all have an interest in our reputation being maintained. The 
principles of defamation are applicable to everyone—though the high costs of bringing a claim, combined 
with the absence of legal aid to support such claims, may mean that its universality is more theoretical than 
real.
1
p. 482
17. Defamation
Page 3 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The torts of defamation: libel and slander
While we might refer to the (singular) tort of defamation, it comes in two forms: libel and slander. A 
distinction is drawn at common law between libel (a defamatory statement in permanent form, 
typically writing, but also including, for example, ‘a statue, a caricature, an effigy, chalk marks on a 
wall, signs, or pictures’ (Monson v Tussauds Ltd [1894] at 692)) and slander (statements that are 
temporary or transitory, usually speech but also mimicry, gestures and sign language). The test is one 
of ‘permanence’ rather than form.2 Thus, not all spoken insults or ‘speech’ are treated as slander—for 
example, defamatory song lyrics are libellous, despite the fact they are spoken. Ultimately, the 
question of classification is largely a matter of common sense. Clearly, there are 
↵
borderline cases 
—an insult written in sand on a beach, for example. However, such cases arise more often in the 
imagination of tort textbook writers than in the courtroom.3
Although the distinction between the torts of libel and slander had long been criticised as an 
unnecessarily historical relic,4 the Defamation Act 2013 did not abolish it. Rather, section 1(1) makes 
clear that in all cases of defamation the claimant needs to demonstrate that the publication of the 
defamatory statement has ‘caused or is likely to cause serious harm’—or injury—‘to the reputation of 
the claimant’. And that, on top of this, in the case of slander the claimant must demonstrate some sort 
of material loss flowing from this (mirroring the common law position): for example, by losing money 
as a result of being shunned by business clients—with the exception of cases of imputation of 
criminal conduct and incompetence in business dealings where, reflecting the previous common law 
position, there is no need to demonstrate special damage.5
In the tort of defamation an individual’s reputation is said to be pitted against freedom of expression. At its 
heart lies the question as to when an individual’s interest in what people think of them should trump or 
silence the freedom of others to be able to say what they know, or think they know, about them. Freedom of 
expression is considered so important that (in contrast with one’s interest in one’s reputation) it is protected 
under the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and the Human Rights Act 1998. However, as both 
make clear, one’s right to freedom of expression is not unlimited. Individuals do not have complete freedom 
to say whatever they like, whenever they like. Article 10(2) provides that an individual’s ability to exercise 
this right can be restricted in the interests of a democratic society including ‘for the protection of the rights 
and freedoms of others’. Accordingly, one of the fundamental questions that the tort of defamation has to 
resolve is where to strike the balance between the right to freedom of expression and an individual’s desire to 
protect their reputation.
Inevitably there is disagreement as to whether and when the courts have struck the right balance. Certainly 
there are examples where defamation has been used by individuals and companies to suppress criticism with 
disquieting effect. And, certainly, until relatively recently the tort of defamation essentially allowed an 
individual to sue another who said anything that might make a third party think less of the claimant without 
2
p. 483
3
4
5
17. Defamation
Page 4 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
having to show that what was said was untrue, that it caused them harm or that the speaker was 
unreasonable or at fault. This has now changed. Section 1 of the Defamation Act 2013 introduced a ‘serious 
harm’ requirement intended to ensure that only the most egregious cases are brought.6
Pause for reflection
Despite the changes introduced by the 2013 Act, the tort of defamation provides an individual or 
company with relatively heavy-duty tools with which to protect their reputation against another’s 
fundamental right to free speech and expression. However, does an individual’s reputation really 
require this much protection? Tony Weir suggests:
[T]he protection may be thought to be all the odder in that the only kinds of harm apt to 
result from being badmouthed are emotional upset and financial loss, neither of which is 
very readily redressed in the law even where the defendant’s negligence has been 
demonstrated.7
Do you agree? Think again about the purposes of tort law (discussed in section 1.3).
The Defamation Act 2013 was the result of a long campaign arguing that the common law on defamation was 
not fit for purpose. The Act was touted as turning ‘English libel laws from an international laughing stock to 
an international blueprint’.8 Certainly the Act introduced wide-ranging reforms including the seriousness 
threshold, ‘new’ statutory defences of responsible publication on matters of public interest, truth (replacing 
the common law defence of justification) and honest opinion (replacing the common law defence of honest 
comment) as well as changes to the multiple publication rule and measures designed to inhibit so-called ‘libel 
tourism’.
Crucially, however, the Act did not replace the common law (in the sense that the earlier common law is now 
irrelevant). The Act not only develops many common law principles but is intended (in places) to mirror the 
previous common law position. The Act, to adopt Matthew Collins’s analogy, is:
Frankenstein’s monster: countless complications and piecemeal reforms riveted to the rusting hulk 
of a centuries’ old cause of action … No-one [he concludes] starting from scratch, would devise 
defamation laws of the kind with which England and Wales, and the rest of the common law world, 
have been saddled.9
What this means for our purposes is that it is necessary to understand both the common law and new Act.10
17.2  Establishing a claim in defamation
In order to establish a claim in the tort of defamation four questions need to be addressed:
6
p. 484
7
8
9
10
p. 485
17. Defamation
Page 5 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Is the statement defamatory?
Does the statement refer to the claimant?
Has the statement been published or communicated to a third party?
Are there any applicable defences?
We shall take each question in turn. However, before we do so there is one further point to address: who can 
bring a claim in defamation.
17.2.1  Who can sue?
A defamation claim can be brought by any living human being. Whatever other reasons there may be for 
adhering to the old adage not to speak ill of the dead, the fear of a defamation claim is not one of them—an 
action does not survive the death of either party (Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934, s 1(1)). 
More controversially, companies are also able to bring a defamation claim (South Hetton Coal Co v North- 
Eastern News Association Ltd [1894]). After all, as Lord Bingham noted in Jameel v Wall Street Journal Europe 
[2007], they too have a reputation to protect:
the good name of a company, as that of an individual, is a thing of value. A damaging libel may lower 
its standing in the eyes of the public and even its own staff and make people less ready to deal with 
it, less willing and less proud to work for it … I find nothing repugnant in the notion that this is a 
value which the law should protect. (at [26])11
This may be true. However, it is not immediately obvious why a company’s reputation needs quite as much 
protection as that of an individual. This has been (partly) addressed in section 1 of the Defamation Act 2013. 
As with any other defamation claimant, a company (or any other ‘body that trades for profit’) now needs to 
establish that the defamatory statement has caused, or is likely to cause, ‘serious harm’ to its reputation 
(discussed in section 17.3). In addition, section 1(2) requires that, in relation to companies, this harm is 
manifested as ‘serious financial loss’ (rather than, say, the company’s goodwill or public image). Though, in 
truth, this is not a particularly high hurdle—not least because it extends to potential (as well as actual) 
losses.12
Others go even further and argue that companies should not be able to bring defamation claims at all. 
Allowing them to do so, it is suggested, ignores the power of big business and can have a ‘chilling effect’ upon 
potential critics and challengers.13 Limiting companies’ 
↵
ability to claim in defamation would, it is 
argued, be in line with the decision in Derbyshire County Council v Times Newspapers Ltd [1993] in which the 
House of Lords recognised that restricting an individual’s ability to openly criticise national and local 
government would be contrary to the democratic process and would ‘place an undesirable fetter on freedom 
of speech’ (at 549).
11
12
13
p. 486
17. Defamation
Page 6 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Derbyshire County Council v Times Newspapers Ltd [1993] AC 534 (HL)
Derbyshire County Council sued The Times newspaper over two articles which had questioned the 
propriety of its financial dealings. However, before the case could proceed, the court had first to decide 
whether the council was able to bring an action. The House of Lords unanimously held that the 
council was unable to sue in defamation:
It is of the highest public importance that a democratically elected governmental body, or 
indeed any governmental body, should be open to uninhibited public criticism. The threat of 
a civil action for defamation must inevitably have an inhibiting effect on freedom of speech. 
(Lord Keith at 547)
The reasoning in Derbyshire was applied to political parties in Goldsmith v Bhoyrul [1997]. However, crucially, 
these decisions do not prevent politicians and parliamentarians from bringing defamation claims (see e.g. 
Lord McAlpine’s defamation claims against a number of high-profile tweeters, including comedian Alan 
Davies and Sally Bercow, for tweets linking him to child sex abuse).14 An argument can be made that this 
ability to bring, or threaten to bring, defamation proceedings has the same ‘chilling effect’ on political debate 
and commentary and that, at least in relation to comments about their performance as MPs, this should 
similarly be restricted.15
The 2013 Act introduced a further restriction on who can sue. Purporting to address so-called ‘libel 
tourism’,16 section 9 of the Defamation Act 2013 creates a ‘threshold test’ for actions against non-domiciled 
persons (i.e. persons not living in the UK, EU or in a Lugano Convention state). In such cases, the courts in 
England and Wales lack jurisdiction unless they are ‘satisfied that, of all the places in the world in which the 
statement complained of has been published, England and Wales is clearly the most appropriate place in 
which to bring an action in respect of the statement’ (s 9(2); Wright v Ver [2020]).
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-17-2>.
17.3  Is the statement defamatory?
A statement is defamatory if it is likely to make others think less of the person referred to: the words or 
statement must tend to ‘lower the claimant in the estimation of right-thinking members of society in 
general’, causing them to be shunned or avoided (Sim v Stretch [1936] at 1240). The meaning of the 
defamatory statement is not, then, that which the claimant—or even the defendant—may actually have 
attached to it, but rather that derived from an objective assessment to be determined by ‘right-thinking 
14
15
16
p. 487
17. Defamation
Page 7 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
members of society’. But who are these right-thinking members of society? The answer, of course, is the 
ubiquitous reasonable person—here the reasonable reader, viewer or listener—described by Lord Reid in 
Lewis v Daily Telegraph [1964] as ‘someone who is fair-minded, who is not avid for scandal, nor overly 
suspicious nor unduly naïve, nor bound to select one defamatory meaning when non-defamatory meanings 
are possible’ (at 260).
This is a relatively low threshold. Where a statement, for example, suggests that the claimant has broken or 
ignored the beliefs or practices of a particular group to which they belong, it is the implication of hypocrisy or 
disloyalty which is actionable, even if the ordinary person is indifferent to the claims made in the original 
statement. And so while to suggest that someone places the occasional bet is not in itself defamatory, to 
suggest this of a local vicar who has campaigned vociferously against a new bingo hall may be. The point here 
is not whether people generally think badly of occasional gamblers, but rather the implication of double 
standards which could have a significant negative impact on an individual’s reputation.17
Counterpoint
The tort of defamation treads a thin line. There are certain things which in the eyes of most ‘right- 
minded people’ will not lower their estimation of an individual. Being gay, for example, or having 
been raped or having a serious contagious illness or disease, no longer will (or should) make people 
generally think badly of the person involved.18 The claimant—and then the law—is faced with a 
problem. While such allegations should not be considered damaging, and in the minds of properly 
right-thinking people are not, sadly they often are. Not all people are right-minded (however much we 
might wish otherwise). Given this, statements which should not negatively impact on people’s views 
of the claimant will nonetheless do so, sometimes seriously. The dilemma here is that if we take the 
requirement that the statement must lower the claimant’s standing in the eyes of right-minded 
people seriously, there will be situations where 
↵
a claimant’s reputation is unfairly damaged but 
for which the law provides no remedy. However, if the law is to recognise a claim in these 
circumstances then the law risks lending its support to the view that being gay, having been raped, 
suffering from a serious contagious illness and the like are negative attributes.
Historically, libel was actionable per se. While the courts had gone some way in ‘raising the bar’ to restrict 
claims by adding a ‘seriousness’ requirement to considerations as to whether a statement is defamatory 
(Jameel v Dow Jones & Co Inc [2005]; Thornton v Telegraph Media Group Ltd [2010]), section 1(1) of the 
Defamation Act 2013 raises it further still. A defamatory statement is only actionable if it causes, or is likely to 
cause, serious harm to the claimant’s reputation. As with any new statutory requirement, there has been a 
period of ‘bedding in’ as judges interpret and apply it and the interpretation of section 1 finally reached the 
Supreme Court in Lachaux v Independent Print Ltd [2019].
17
18
p. 488
17. Defamation
Page 8 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Lachaux v Independent Print Ltd [2019] UKSC 27 (SC)
The case involved a series of articles published in The Independent, i, the Evening Standard and 
Huffington Post, about events that had taken place in the United Arab Emirates, including details of 
allegations that the claimant had kidnapped his and his ex-wife’s son, as well as allegations of 
domestic violence made by the claimant’s ex-wife. In the High Court, Warby J held that Lachaux had 
demonstrated, by evidence, that the harm caused by the defamatory publications complained of was 
‘serious’, within the meaning of section 1(1). The Court of Appeal, while agreeing with Warby J’s 
conclusion on the substance of the case, thought that he had gone too far in his interpretation of 
‘serious harm’. The question for the Supreme Court was therefore how section 1(1) should be 
interpreted.
Unanimously dismissing the newspapers’ appeal, the Supreme Court held that section 1:
not only raises the threshold of seriousness above that envisaged in Jameel (Yousef) and 
Thornton, but requires its application to be determined by reference to the actual facts about 
its impact and not just to the meaning of the words. (at [12])
To find otherwise, Lord Sumption continued, would mean that section 1 did nothing to alter the 
common law, which was clearly contrary to Parliament’s intention:
[S]ection 1 necessarily means that a statement which would previously have been regarded 
as defamatory, because of its inherent tendency to cause some harm to reputation, is not to 
be so regarded unless it ‘has caused or is likely to cause’ harm which is ‘serious’. The 
reference to a situation where the statement ‘has caused’ serious harm is to the 
consequences of the publication, and not the publication itself. It points to some historic 
harm, which is shown to have actually occurred. This is a proposition of fact which can be 
established only by reference to the impact which the statement is shown actually to have 
had. It depends on a combination of the inherent tendency of the words and their actual 
impact on those to whom they were communicated. (at [14])
↵
On the facts, the court largely adopted Warby J’s approach to determining whether the harm 
caused, or likely to be caused, was ‘serious’:
p. 489
17. Defamation
Page 9 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
[Warby J] based his finding of serious harm on (i) the scale of the publications; (ii) the fact 
that the statements complained of had come to the attention of at least one identifiable 
person in the United Kingdom who knew Mr Lachaux and (iii) that they were likely to have 
come to the attention of others who either knew him or would come to know him in future; 
and (iv) the gravity of the statements themselves, according to the meaning attributed to 
them. … Mr Lachaux would have been entitled to produce evidence from those who had read 
the statements about its impact on them. But I do not accept, any more than the judge did, 
that his case must necessarily fail for want of such evidence. The judge’s finding was based 
on a combination of the meaning of the words, the situation of Mr Lachaux, the 
circumstances of publication and the inherent probabilities. There is no reason why 
inferences of fact as to the seriousness of the harm done to Mr Lachaux’s reputation should 
not be drawn from considerations of this kind.19
In deciding whether the statement is defamatory, the courts will look at the statements in context including 
the scale of the publications, actual and potential readership (and their relationship to the claimant) and the 
gravity of the statements themselves.20 It is not enough for the claimant to point to the headline or a 
particular sentence or paragraph in isolation from the piece as a whole in order to ground a claim. As Nicklin J 
noted in Koutsogiannis v The Random House Group Ltd [2019]:
The publication must be read as a whole, and any ‘bane and antidote’ taken together. Sometimes, the 
context will clothe the words in a more serious defamatory meaning (for example the classic 
‘rogues’ gallery’ case). In other cases, the context will weaken (even extinguish altogether) the 
defamatory meaning that the words would bear if they were read in isolation (e.g. bane and antidote 
cases). (at [12])
These ‘well-established and uncontroversial principles’ were applied in Riley v Murray [2022].
Riley v Murray [2022] EWCA Civ 1146 (CA)
The case involved a series of tweets by Rachel Riley, a well-known TV personality (who has spoken 
publicly to condemn what she regards as the fostering of anti-Semitism in the Labour Party under its 
former leader, Jeremy Corbyn), Owen Jones, a Guardian journalist, and the defendant, Murray, who 
worked in Corbyn’s political office. In January 2019, Jones had posted a tweet in response to an egg 
being thrown at Nick Griffin, the former leader of the British National Party: ‘… I think sound life 
advice is, if you don’t want eggs thrown at you, don’t be a Nazi. Seems fair to me’. Following a report 
that an egg had been thrown at Corbyn, Riley screenshot Jones’s tweet and posted it with the 
comment ‘Good advice’, accompanied by pictures of a red rose and an egg. This was subsequently 
referred to as the ‘Good Advice Tweet’. The defendant responded with the following tweet:
19
20
p. 490
17. Defamation
Page 10 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(i)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(ii)
(iii)
Today Jeremy Corbyn went to his local mosque for Visit My Mosque Day, and was attacked 
by a Brexiteer. Rachel Riley tweets that Corbyn deserves to be violently attacked because he is 
a Nazi. This woman is as dangerous as she is stupid. Nobody should engage with her. Ever.
This was held to be defamatory. The Court of Appeal, agreeing with the determination of Nicklin J, 
held:
An important aspect of these for present purposes is the ‘single meaning rule’ explained in 
Koutsogiannis [(at [11])]:–
The Court’s task is to determine the single natural and ordinary meaning of the 
words complained of, which is the meaning that the hypothetical reasonable reader 
would understand the words bear. It is well recognised that there is an artificiality in 
this process because individual readers may understand words in different ways: 
Slim v Daily Telegraph Ltd [1968] …
The process of identifying the single natural and ordinary meaning of a statement is an 
objective one. The intention of the publisher is irrelevant and no evidence is admissible other 
than the publication complained of itself …
Applying these principles Nicklin J determined that:
The natural and ordinary meaning of the tweet is:
Jeremy Corbyn had been attacked when he visited a mosque.
The claimant had publicly stated in a tweet that he deserved to be violently 
attacked.
By so doing, the claimant has shown herself to be a dangerous and stupid person 
who risked inciting unlawful violence. People should not engage with her.
Paragraphs (1) and (2) are statements of fact. Paragraph (3) is an expression of 
opinion.
Paragraphs (2) and (3) are defamatory at common law. (Warby LJ at [11]–[13])
The Court of Appeal also upheld Nicklin J’s findings in relation to the statutory defences of truth, 
honest opinion and publication on a matter of public interest. Riley’s original award of £10,000, 
which had been reduced by the trial judge to reflect the ‘provocative, even mischievous’ nature of her 
conduct in posting her Good Advice Tweet, was upheld (at [16]).
17. Defamation
Page 11 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
↵
In Charleston v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1995] the House of Lords held that the defendants were not 
liable in defamation for an article featuring degrading, faked photographs of the claimants—two popular 
Australian TV soap actors in the early 1990s—as the accompanying text made it clear that the photographs 
were not real. The decision as to whether the material was capable of being defamatory must be determined 
according to the meaning an ordinary, reasonable, fair-minded reader would understand from it, rather than 
on its effect on a sub-group of limited readers who looked only at pictures and headlines.21
More recently, in Spicer v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2019] the headline on the Metropolitan 
Police website stating ‘Two guilty of killing a woman while racing their cars’ was not found to be defamatory 
against the driver of one of the cars who had been acquitted of causing death and causing injury by dangerous 
driving:
The headline is inconsistent with the text. It is not true that two men were ‘guilty of killing a 
woman’. But ordinary reasonable readers would not allow the headline to distort the meaning they 
took from the article as a whole. Readers are familiar with discordance between headlines and 
articles. Here, the more detailed explanation of events was in the article itself. It clearly stated that 
one man had been convicted of killing and another acquitted. Reading the headline and article 
together a reasonable reader would conclude that the headline was wrong. Some readers might 
think this odd, or sloppy, and move on. Discordance between headline and text is hardly unknown. 
But whatever conclusion (if any) the reader drew about the reasons for it, I am confident the reader 
would not see the claimant as a convicted killer. (Warby J at [35])
But what about where the meaning of the potentially defamatory statement is unclear? How should a judge 
go about determining the meaning of what has been said?
Stocker v Stocker [2019] UKSC 17 (SC)
The defendant, Nicola Stocker, had posted a number of comments on the Facebook wall of her ex- 
husband’s new partner in which she claimed her ex-husband, Ronald Stocker, had ‘tried to strangle 
me’. She also made a number of allegations about threats, ‘gun issues’ and the breach of a non- 
molestation order, all of which contributed a ‘picture of acute marital breakdown’ (at [4]). Mr Stocker 
began proceedings against her for defamation. The question for the court was what the words ‘He 
tried to strangle me’ conveyed to the ‘ordinary reasonable reader’ of a Facebook post? (at [1]).
At trial (finding for Mr Stocker) the judge, Mitting J, relied (in error) on the Oxford English Dictionary 
in his determination of meaning: either Mr Stocker had tried to kill his wife, or he had constricted her 
neck or throat painfully. On this view, the fact that Mrs Stocker said that her husband had tried to 
strangle her precluded the possibility of the latter meaning 
↵
being attributed (as he had in fact 
done this): the only possible meaning of Mrs Stocker’s posts was that Mr Stocker had tried to kill her, 
something which Mrs Stocker was unable to justify.
p. 491
21
p. 492
17. Defamation
Page 12 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Despite his success in the lower courts, Mr Stocker lost in the Supreme Court. The trial judge, a 
unanimous Supreme Court held, had simply got it wrong in law:
Mitting J fell into legal error by relying upon the dictionary definition of the verb ‘to strangle’ 
as dictating the meaning of Mrs Stocker’s Facebook post, rather than as (as Sharp LJ [in the 
Court of Appeal] suggested) a check. In consequence, he failed to conduct a realistic 
exploration of how the ordinary reader of the post would have understood it. Readers of 
Facebook posts do not subject them to close analysis. They do not have someone by their 
side pointing out the possible meanings that might, theoretically, be given to the post. … 
Taking a broad, overarching view, and keeping in mind that only one meaning could be 
chosen, the choice to be made between the meaning of the words being that Mr Stocker 
grasped his wife by the neck or that he tried to kill her is, in my opinion, a clear one. If Mrs 
Stocker had meant to convey that her husband had attempted to kill her, why would she not 
say so explicitly? And, given that she made no such allegation, what would the ordinary 
reasonable reader, the casual viewer of this Facebook post, think that it meant? In my view, 
giving due consideration to the context in which the message was posted, the interpretation 
that Mr Stocker had grasped his wife by the neck is the obvious, indeed the inescapable, 
choice of meaning. (Lord Kerr at [47]–[48])
Lord Kerr went on to consider the defence of justification22:
In light of my conclusion as to the correct meaning to be given to the words, ‘tried to strangle 
me’, section 5 of the Defamation Act 195223 must occupy centre stage. It is beyond dispute 
that Mr Stocker grasped his wife by the throat so tightly as to leave red marks on her neck 
visible to police officers two hours after the attack on her took place. It is not disputed that he 
breached a non-molestation order. Nor has it been asserted that he did not utter threats to 
Mrs Stocker. Many would consider these to be sufficient to establish that he was a dangerous 
and disreputable man, which is the justification which Mrs Stocker sought to establish. … 
Even if all her allegations were considered not to have been established to the letter, there is 
more than enough to satisfy the provision in section 5 of the 1952 Act that her defence of 
justification should not fail by reason only that the truth of every charge is not proved, 
having regard to the truth of what has been proved. (at [61]–[62])
Pause for reflection
↵
In the age of #MeToo, traditional and social media have become an important way for women 
(and some men) to expose, challenge and seek acknowledgement for harms they have suffered. In a 
world where we continue to see high levels of sexism, misogyny and systemic institutional failings— 
22
23
p. 493
17. Defamation
Page 13 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
not least within the legal system itself—the media has played a vital role in validating the remarkably 
similar stories of routine violence and abuse perpetrated on women in the workplace, on the streets 
and in their homes. Public reporting of all forms of violence against women and girls (VAWG) can not 
only lead to investigation and redress for individuals concerned, it can also encourage other victims to 
come forward, contributing to a much-needed overthrow of public stereotypes, myths and attitudes 
surrounding violence against women.24
However, lined up against this is the full force of defamation laws, non-disclosure agreements and 
super-injunctions which remain usually, though not always, in the hands of rich men.25 Harriet 
Wistrich, from the Centre for Women’s Justice, has suggested that what we are seeing is:
a worrying trend where wealthy men who are accused of abuse are able to buy victims’ 
silence.26 Libel proceedings are extremely costly and few can risk speaking out for fear of 
punitive costs awards against them despite the huge public interest in exposing serious 
wrongdoing. In libel, serious harm to reputation seems to be valued more highly than the 
serious harm of violence against women that may be exposed by victims speaking out.27
So viewed, cases like Stocker then are about far more than statutory interpretation. They are about 
(abuse of) power. They are about freedom of expression. They are about the role of the media in aiding 
—and hindering—the pursuit of justice.
↵
In 2021, UN special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression, Irene Khan, noted that, ‘[i]n a perverse twist in the #MeToo age’ the justice system is 
increasingly being ‘weaponized … to silence women’: women who publicly denounce alleged perpetrators of 
sexual violence online are increasingly subject to defamation suits.28
In our video ‘Where money talks: defamation, sexual violence and gendered power’ we explore this further, 
focusing on another key characteristics of many of these cases: the wealth of the defendant. Is it that, when it 
comes to bringing a defamation case in the context of sexual violence, money talks?
Video playback is not supported in this format.
Video 17: Where money talks: defamation, sexual violence and gendered power
It is also no excuse for the defendant to say that they did not intend the words to be defamatory (although 
intention may be relevant to possible defences and may reduce the award of damages). The tort of defamation 
protects an individual’s reputation, and a statement can damage an individual’s reputation, even where it 
turns out that the defendant did not mean what they said. However, a defendant may argue that the words 
were ‘mere abuse’, uttered in rage and not intended to be taken seriously. Mere abuse is not (usually) 
24
25
26
27
p. 494
28
17. Defamation
Page 14 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
defamatory. The line between mere abuse and a defamatory statement is a fine one. In Berkoff v Burchill 
[1996], for example, Steven Berkoff, an actor and film director, sued Julie Burchill, a well-known journalist, 
for libel over two comments made about him in her column in the Sunday Times in which she referred to him 
as ‘hideously ugly’ and, on the second occasion, a review of a production of Frankenstein compared him to 
Frankenstein’s monster. The defendants argued that the essence of the tort of defamation was damage to 
reputation, not hurt feelings or annoyance, and that while the statement may have caused the latter, it had 
not caused the former. This was rejected by the majority of the Court of Appeal. Holding that the word 
‘reputation’ is to be interpreted ‘in the broad sense as comprehending all aspects of a person’s standing in the 
community’ (at 151), Neill LJ went on to hold that the words ‘hideously ugly’ could be defamatory ‘even 
though they neither impute disgraceful conduct to the [claimant] nor any lack of skill or efficiency in the 
conduct of his trade or business or professional activity, if they hold him up to contempt, scorn, or ridicule or 
tend to exclude him from society’ (at 146).29 Millett LJ dissented, pointing out that Burchill’s words were an 
attack on Berkoff’s appearance rather than reputation. Burchill had simply made a cheap joke at Berkoff’s 
expense: ‘it is [he argued] one thing to ridicule a man; it is another to expose him to ridicule … people must be 
able to poke fun at each other without fear of litigation’ (at 153).
More recently in Vine v Barton [2024], a series of posts by former Premier League footballer, Joey Barton, on X 
calling radio and TV presenter Jeremy Vine a ‘bike nonce’ and ‘pedo defender’ were held to be defamatory and 
not—as Barton contended—‘mere vulgar abuse’: ‘The hypothetical reader would not have gained the 
impression that this was meaningless invective hurled in the heat of the moment’ but rather that ‘the 
claimant has a sexual interest in children, and he defends paedophiles’ (Steyn J at [58], [202]).
17.3.1  Innuendo
The tort of defamation is not confined to openly defamatory statements. This makes sense—were the law 
otherwise it would be possible to frame an attack on an individual’s reputation indirectly, in the knowledge 
that they would be unable to do anything about it. The detrimental impact on a person’s reputation is the 
same whether one says ‘there was a miscarriage of justice when X was cleared of murder’ or ‘X is a 
murderer’ (Lewis v Daily Telegraph [1964] at 258).
Monson v Tussauds Ltd [1894] QB 671 (CA)
The claimant had been tried for murder in Scotland and released on a verdict of ‘Not Proven’, a form of 
acquittal. The defendants placed a waxwork of the claimant with a gun in a room adjoining the 
‘Chamber of Horrors’. The Court of Appeal held that the scene was capable of being defamatory.
These implied or veiled attacks on someone’s reputation are called innuendo. Innuendo is a mechanism 
through which the courts are able to attribute to a statement its legal meaning. It typically arises in relation to 
statements that do not appear defamatory, but which, because of background knowledge or information, 
29
p. 495
17. Defamation
Page 15 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
nevertheless make people think worse of the claimant. The test for determining whether the ascribed 
meaning is capable of being defamatory remains an objective one: what view would right-thinking people 
knowing the additional information make of the statement?
Traditionally there are said to be two types of innuendo, although the line between them may, at times, be 
difficult to draw:
false or popular innuendo—where the reader needs to simply read between the lines to uncover the 
true meaning of the defamatory statement;
true or legal innuendo—where the defamatory nature of the statement is not apparent on its face but 
depends on facts or circumstances known to those to whom the statement is published.
An example of false or popular innuendo can be seen in Lewis v Daily Telegraph [1964]. The Daily Telegraph 
reported that the company (of which Lewis was the chairman) was being investigated by the Fraud Squad. It 
included reference to the claimant’s name. After the investigation the company was absolved of all 
wrongdoing. The claimant sued in defamation claiming that ordinary readers would ‘read between the lines’ 
and assume that the company’s affairs had been conducted dishonestly. The defendants admitted the articles 
were defamatory, but argued that they didn’t go so far as to include actual guilt of fraud and so could be 
defended on the grounds of truth. The majority of the House of Lords agreed:
[w]hat the ordinary man, not avid for scandal, would read into the words complained of must be a 
matter of impression. I can only say that I do not think that he would infer guilt of fraud merely 
because an inquiry is on foot. (Lord Reid at 260)
Indeed, were it otherwise it would be impossible to report any criminal investigation.
↵
Legal or true innuendo relies on some additional information known only to those to whom the 
statement is published. So, for example, the statement that the claimant ‘is no Florence Nightingale’ might 
imply to the ordinary reader that the claimant lacks compassion—as Florence Nightingale is well known for 
her compassion—whereas to say that the claimant was seen having an intimate dinner with her dance 
partner is not in itself defamatory, it becomes so only in relation to people who know that she is recently 
married, to whom it might carry the implication that she is having an affair (see e.g. Fullam v Newcastle 
Chronicle & Journal Ltd [1977]).
A discussion of innuendo arose in the context of a high-profile ‘Twibel’ (Twitter libel) case involving a 
defamatory tweet sent by Sally Bercow about former Deputy Chairman and Treasurer of the Conservative 
Party, Lord McAlpine (McAlpine v Bercow [2013]).
p. 496
17. Defamation
Page 16 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
McAlpine v Bercow [2013] EWHC 1342 (QB)
In November 2012, the defendant sent a tweet: ‘Why is Lord McAlpine trending? *Innocent face*’. At 
the time, Bercow had over 56,000 followers. It followed a BBC Newsnight report which included a 
serious allegation of child abuse and references to ‘a leading Conservative politician from the 
Thatcher years’ and ‘a prominent Tory politician at the time’. Following the broadcast there was 
intense media speculation as to the politician’s identity, as well as on Twitter which led to McAlpine’s 
name ‘trending’. Unfortunately, it was a case of mistaken identity: it was quickly accepted that Lord 
McAlpine was entirely innocent.
In deciding the meaning of the tweet, Tugendhat J stated:
In respect of an innuendo meaning, a claimant must, in addition to identifying the meaning 
complained of, prove the extrinsic facts relied upon and prove that these facts were known to 
readers … The claimant will have been defamed in the minds of those readers, but not in the 
minds of the readers who did not know the extrinsic facts. (at [50])
He continued:
The legal principles to be applied when determining the question of meaning are in part 
derived from the [Lewis v Daily Telegraph] case. They were summarised by Sir Anthony 
Clarke MR in Jeynes v News Magazines Ltd [2008] at [14]–[15] (where ‘he’ means ‘he or she’):
The legal principles relevant to meaning have been summarised many times and are 
not in dispute. … They may be summarised in this way: (1) The governing principle 
is reasonableness. (2) The hypothetical reasonable reader is not naïve but he is not 
unduly suspicious. He can read between the lines. He can read in an implication 
more readily than a lawyer and may indulge in a certain amount of loose thinking 
but he must be treated as being a man who is not avid for scandal and someone who 
does not, and should not, select one bad meaning where other non-defamatory 
meanings are available. (3) Over-elaborate analysis is best avoided. (4) The 
intention of the publisher is irrelevant. (5) The article must be read as a whole, and 
any ‘bane and antidote’ taken together. (6) The hypothetical reader is taken to be 
representative of those who would read the publication in question.
↵
It is important in this case to stress point (6). The tweet was not a publication to the 
world at large, such as a daily newspaper or broadcast. It was a publication on Twitter. The 
hypothetical reader must be taken to be a reasonable representative of users of Twitter who 
follow the Defendant. (at [57]–[58])
p. 497
17. Defamation
Page 17 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Tugendhat J rejected the defendant’s claim that she was simply asking for information, and found 
that the tweet meant ‘in its natural and ordinary defamatory meaning, that the claimant was a 
paedophile who was guilty of sexually abusing boys living in care’ (at [90]). However, he continued, ‘If 
I were wrong about that, I would find that the tweet bore an innuendo meaning to the same effect. But 
if it is an innuendo meaning it is one that was understood by that small number of readers who, 
before reading the tweet on 4 November, either remembered, or had learnt, that the Claimant had 
been a prominent Conservative politician in the Thatcher years’ (at [91]), that is to those people who 
had the additional knowledge to interpret the meaning of the tweet.30
The defendant later apologised for her ‘irresponsible use of Twitter’ and agreed to pay the claimant 
undisclosed damages.
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-17-3>.
17.4  Does the statement refer to the claimant?
The defamatory statement must refer to the claimant. The question to be asked is this: would a reasonable 
person understand the statement as referring to the claimant? Where the claimant is named—including by a 
nickname, initials or even job title (e.g. ‘Home Secretary’)—there is usually no difficulty. However, the more 
obscure the reference, the more need there is for a ‘peg or pointer’ in the statement itself or to be provided by 
the context in which the statement was made that identifies the claimant. In such cases, the test is whether 
the hypothetical reasonable reader, having knowledge of the circumstances, would believe that the article 
was referring to the claimant (Morgan v Odhams Press Ltd [1971]).
If the claimant is not clearly identified in the statement, and so where one would need to know certain 
additional background information to connect the claimant to the statement made by the defendant, the 
claimant must show that the statement was actually published to people who knew the additional 
information—that is, to people who could have made the connection between the statement and the 
claimant. Otherwise all there is is a statement which might have defamed the claimant if addressed to the 
right people, but which, in the end, did not.
What about statements that unintentionally refer to the claimant? For instance, certain names are common, 
and so a statement referring to, say, Joe Bloggs, may refer to any potential number of individuals who share 
that name. Can the author be liable in defamation, even where they did not intend their statement to refer to 
the claimant, and indeed intended it to identify someone else? The short answer is yes. The tort of defamation 
30
17. Defamation
Page 18 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
is not concerned with whether the defendant intended to harm an individual’s reputation, but rather whether 
↵
their words are capable of causing this outcome. Thus, a defendant may be liable even when they 
intended their statement as a piece of fiction (Hulton & Co v Jones [1910]).31
Hulton & Co v Jones [1910] AC 20 (HL)
The defendants (a newspaper company) published a fictional account of a motor festival in Dieppe 
featuring ‘Artemus Jones’, a church warden from Peckham. The claimant was a barrister also called 
Artemus Jones. He was unknown to the author of the story and his editor (although he had once 
worked for the newspaper). He was not a church warden. He did not live in Peckham, nor had he 
attended the motor festival in Dieppe. Nevertheless, he sued in libel, claiming that a number of his 
friends had read the story and believed it to refer to him. The House of Lords agreed. There was 
sufficient evidence to suggest that a jury could reasonably conclude that a reasonable person would 
believe that the story referred to the claimant.
Similarly, in Newstead v London Express Newspaper Ltd [1940], the defendant newspaper published an account 
of the trial for bigamy of ‘Harold Newstead, a thirty year old Camberwell man’. Unfortunately for the 
newspaper, this description was true of more than one man. Another Harold Newstead, a non-bigamist who 
also lived in Camberwell and who was about the same age as the other Harold Newstead, successfully sued for 
libel. Although recognising the considerable burden their decision would place on newspapers, the Court of 
Appeal held that it was not unreasonable, given the significant consequences for the ‘wrong’ man, to expect 
the party who publishes such statements to make sure they identify the person so closely that little or no 
confusion arises.32
However, not every unintentional reference will ground a claim. In O’Shea v MGN Ltd [2001], the Sunday 
Mirror ran an advertisement for an adult internet service featuring a model who closely resembled the 
claimant. O’Shea sued in libel claiming that people who did not realise that the model in the advert was not in 
fact her would conclude that she had consented to appear on a highly pornographic website. Rejecting her 
claim, Morland J held that although the image was at common law defamatory, to hold the newspaper liable 
in defamation would be contrary to Article 10 ECHR. Distinguishing Hulton and Newstead as cases where the 
claimant could have more easily been identified, Morland J suggested it would impose an ‘impossible burden 
on a publisher if he were required to check if the true picture of someone resembled someone else who 
because of the context of the picture was defamed’ (at [43]).
p. 498
31
32
17. Defamation
Page 19 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
↵
O’Shea appears to create a distinction between unintentional defamation in photographs and 
unintentional defamation in writing, with only the latter being actionable. Is this distinction 
sustainable?
Morland J’s point is that it would be virtually impossible for defendants to ensure that the individuals 
in photos they publish could not be wrongly identified—after all most, if not all, of us look more or 
less like someone else. By contrast, when writing, there is more scope for ensuring that the correct 
person is identified, simply by including more information. So while there may be any number of 
people named Joe Bloggs, there are likely to be fewer who live in, say, Oadby, Leicester, and even fewer 
aged 24 and so on. In the end, by providing enough information, it will be possible to ensure that no 
mis-identification can occur.
However, is this a realistic demand to make of publishers? Though we could demand that every time 
someone is named in a newspaper article, sufficient information is included to ensure that no one else 
will be wrongly identified, this would also appear to impose a significant burden on publishers, and 
one which jars with the demands of newspaper and television reporting. This is, of course, the point 
that was made and rejected in Newstead, where the court reasserted that liability in defamation was 
strict and that it was no defence that the defendant acted reasonably and never intended to identify 
the claimant.
But it seems to be precisely this argument that is accepted by the court in O’Shea. The fact that O’Shea 
concerned pictures and Newstead words allowed Morland J to distinguish the decision and rule in 
Newstead. However, in substance both cases seem to raise the same basic question: should a publisher 
who acts entirely reasonably and innocently, not intending their statement or story to identify the 
claimant, be held liable in defamation? It may be that mis-identification is more likely to occur where 
pictures are used, but, as cases such as Newstead show, the same problems can arise with words.
As such, to treat O’Shea as an exception to the general rule of strict liability, which applies to visual 
images only, may not be a satisfactory solution. If so, which way should the law go? Should we view 
O’Shea as wrongly decided or, alternatively, should the reasoning be extended to cases such as Hulton 
and Newstead? Do you think the reasoning in Hulton and Newstead would be likely to withstand an 
Article 10 challenge? Think again about the balance the courts need to strike between the right to 
freedom of expression and an individual’s desire to protect their reputation.33
17.4.1  References to a group or class
Where the defamatory statement refers to a class or group of people, there is no liability unless the class or 
group is so small that the claimant can establish that the statement must apply to every member of the class 
or, alternatively, that the statement refers to them directly: ‘In order to be actionable the defamatory words 
p. 499
33
17. Defamation
Page 20 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
must be understood to be published of and 
↵
concerning the [claimant]’ (Lord Atkin, Knupffer v London 
Express Newspaper Ltd [1944] at 121). So, for example, the statement that ‘all MPs are liars’ is not actionable. 
However, a statement suggesting that ‘all the candidates for London Mayor are corrupt’—where there were 
only ten people in the running—may be. While there is no clear guidance on just how small the group needs 
to be it is suggested that the best approach is to apply the Hulton test—that is, would a reasonable person 
believe that the statement referred to the claimant?
Knupffer v London Express Newspaper Ltd [1944] AC 116 (HL)
During the Second World War the defendant newspaper referred to the ‘quisling activities’ (meaning 
they were colluding or sympathising with Hitler and the Nazi Party) of the Young Russian political 
party, Mlado Russ (or Young Russia). As there were only 24 British members of the party, the 
claimant, a Russian resident in London, argued that, as head of the British branch of the party, British 
readers would assume that the remarks referred to him.
This was rejected by the House of Lords. The article referred only to the party’s activities in France 
and the United States. Since there were several thousand international members, there was no 
evidence that the claimant had been singled out: ‘No doubt it is true to say that a class cannot be 
defamed as a class, nor can an individual be defamed by a general reference to the class to which he 
belongs’ (Lord Porter at 124).
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-17-4>.
17.5  Has the statement been ‘published’?
The third element of a claim in defamation is the requirement that the defamatory statement has been 
published. The term ‘publication’ can be misleading. The requirement is better understood as a need for 
‘communication’—the defamatory statement must be communicated to a third party. A private conversation 
or correspondence between the defendant and the claimant—however insulting or hurtful it may be to the 
claimant—cannot give rise to a claim in defamation.34 The wrong remedied by the tort of defamation is the 
injury to an individual’s reputation—that is, to what others think of them—so if no one but the claimant 
hears or understands what the defendant says there is no risk of this sort of harm. Though traditionally the 
statement need only be published to one person, this now needs to be considered in light of the section 1 
‘serious harm’ requirement. In Webb v Jones [2021], the claimant failed to prove not only that a series of 
Facebook posts had been substantially ‘published’ but also that the posts had caused ‘serious harm’.
p. 500
34
17. Defamation
Page 21 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The fact that the statement is visible on the interest is not enough to establish substantial 
publication … [nor] … it is … enough that someone has read it. If the reading is so rapid and 
superficial as to leave no impression, or no more than a fleeting impression which is of no 
consequence … Most of the reactions consisted only of an emoji click. It is not clear from the 
reactions or any 
↵
other evidence that the person reacting knew that the claimant was the 
person referred to, or knew who she was. It is vanishingly unlikely, on the only evidence available or 
obtainable, that the claimant’s reputation in the real world was damaged at all in the eyes of anyone 
by these posts; let alone to an extent which could conceivably be characterised as serious harm. This 
was confused and confusing ephemeral internet chatter, down thread, and swiftly lost in the 
surrounding hubbub. It is exactly the sort of case that section 1 of the Defamation Act 2013 was 
designed to stop. (Griffiths J at [47]–[48], [69])
Pause for reflection
While the outcome of the case is plainly correct, as Hugh Tomlinson notes, the judge’s reasoning is 
less convincing. In particular, the suggestion that substantial publication could not be inferred from 
the number of Facebook members of the group (approx 16,000) is at odds with the decision in Stocker 
where publication was accepted on the basis of visibility to 110 Facebook friends.35 Similarly, 
Tomlinson continues, it is well established that, contrary to Griffiths J’s view, serious harm can be 
inferred by reference to the gravity of the allegation only:
Depending on the circumstances of the case, the claimant may be able to satisfy section 1 
without calling any evidence, by relying on the inferences of serious harm to reputation 
properly to be drawn from the level of the defamatory meaning of the words and the nature 
and extent of their publication (Warby J, Doyle v Smith [2019] at [117] referring to HHJ 
Moloney QC in Theedom v Nourish Training (trading as CSP Recruitment [2016])).
As Webb v Jones demonstrates, ‘publication’ extends beyond the print media to include websites (Godfrey v 
Demon Internet [2001]; Johnson v Steele [2014]), tweets, including retweets (Cairns v Modi [2012]; McAlpine v 
Bercow [2013]; Monroe v Hopkins [2017]), blogs (Cruddas v Adams [2013]) and posts on Facebook (Stocker v 
Stocker [2018]). The burden falls on the claimant to prove publication and, in the context of multiple posts or 
tweets (or similar), whether they are ‘sufficiently closely connected as to be regarded as a single 
publication’ (Sharp J, Dee v Telegraph Media Group Ltd [2010] at [29]).36
But what about where the publication is unintentional? Where the defendant did not intend anyone to read/ 
hear what they wrote/said? Here the test is one of reasonable foreseeability. If it was reasonably foreseeable 
that a third party would see/hear the statement the defendant will be liable (Theaker v Richardson [1962]).
p. 501
35
36
17. Defamation
Page 22 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Theaker v Richardson [1962] 1 WLR 151 (CA)
The defendant wrote to the claimant accusing her of shoplifting and being ‘a very dirty whore’ and ‘a 
lying low-down brothel-keeping whore and thief’. He put it in an envelope on which he typed the 
claimant’s name and address and put it through her letter-box. Her husband opened it, thinking it 
was an election address. The claimant sued for libel. Allowing her claim and awarding her £500 
damages, the jury found that it was reasonably foreseeable that someone other than the claimant 
might open the envelope.
The decision in Theaker v Richardson can be contrasted with that in Huth v Huth [1915], where a man sent his 
wife a letter which was defamatory of both his wife and their children. It was opened and read by the butler. 
The children sued (at the time, a wife was prohibited in law from suing her husband). The Court of Appeal 
held that it was not foreseeable that a butler would open his employer’s mail: ‘it is no part of a butler’s duties 
to open letters … addressed to his master or mistress’ (Lord Reading CJ at 38). While publication can be 
avoided by marking the mail ‘private and confidential’, messages on the back of postcards sent through the 
post are always treated as published, as are documents (if read) left open, for example, on a desk (in both 
paper and electronic form) or dictated to a personal assistant or secretary (Osborn v Thomas Boulter & Son 
[1930]).
Conversely, it is not possible to publish information you are unaware of and have no control over. In Bunt v 
Tilley [2006], an Internet Service Provider (ISP) was held not to have ‘published’ allegedly defamatory 
postings made in internet chat rooms. While Tamiz v Google Inc [2013] suggested that, once it had been 
drawn to its attention, Google was the ‘second publisher’ of the blog by a third party,37 the ‘operators of 
website’ defence in section 5 of the Defamation Act 2013 (alongside the Defamation (Operators of Websites) 
Regulations 2013) provide websites with complete immunity where they have in place and follow a procedure 
for dealing with potentially defamatory posts by third parties.38
17.5.1  Republication
At common law, a new cause of action arises every time a defamatory statement is republished (Duke of 
Brunswick v Harmer [1849]; confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Banks v Cadwalladr [2023]). A single 
statement may, therefore, have a number of different ‘publishers’.
Section 8 of the Defamation Act 2013 introduces an exception to this. The single publication rule introduces a 
12-month limitation period, from the date of the first publication of that material to the public or a section of 
the public. This prevents an action being brought in relation to publication of the same material or a 
statement which is ‘substantially the same’ by the same publisher. The rule only applies once the material is 
published to the public, or 
↵
section of the public and does not apply when the defamatory material is 
published in a different manner (e.g. if it is moved from an obscure part of a website to the front page) or by 
someone else. One clear application of the rule is in relation to newspaper archives. Under the common law, 
p. 502
37
38
p. 503
17. Defamation
Page 23 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
each time a user accessed an archive a new course of action arose (Loutchansky v Times Newspapers (No 2) 
[2001]). There was a concern that this was having ‘chilling effect’ restricting the creation of such archives 
(though a claim that this amounted to a violation of the newspaper’s Article 10 rights was rejected in Times 
Newspapers (Nos 1 and 2) v UK [2009] on the basis that the publisher could place a note warning of the 
veracity of the article).
But when is a statement ‘substantially’ similar enough to set the limitation clock running? In Parish v 
Wikimedia Foundation, Inc [2024], the claimant, a well-known international lawyer, sought to bring a claim in 
defamation for various statements which had been made over a period of time on his Wikipedia page relating 
to his criminal conviction. Steyn J rejected his claim finding both versions to be ‘substantially the same’ as 
each other:
Both versions of the Wikipedia Page refer to the conviction, the three-year prison sentence, and the 
ban on practising law in Switzerland. In the 10 January Wikipedia Page the arbitration is described as 
‘fake’, whereas in the later version it is described as ‘fraudulent’. However, I agree with the defendant 
that in context this distinction is without substance. The gravamen of the offence, and the resulting 
sentence and ban, is precisely the same. (at 82)
And as such, the earlier version had set the clock running and so the claim—which he issued just short of a 
year out of time—fell outside the one-year limitation period: ‘That is a long delay in the context of a one-year 
limitation period imposed in recognition of the fact that normally a person whose name has been traduced 
can be expected to pursue legal redress promptly and energetically’ (Steyn J at [86]).
Pause for reflection
The limitation period established by section 8 can be seen as at odds with the serious harm 
requirement in section 1. As Wilson et al have argued:
a claimant is required to get on and sue, but they must also show that the statement has 
caused or is likely to cause serious harm. In many instances they will not know what the 
ultimate effect of a publication will be, much less be able to foresee to what extent events will 
enable them to evidence it. This issue was touched upon in an abstract sense by Lord 
Sumption in the Supreme Court’s decision in Lachaux (at [18]) (though not, in our view, 
resolved).39
We may well, therefore, see this issue return to the courts in due course.
But what if your defamatory statement is repeated by someone else? Certainly the person repeating the 
statement will be potentially liable, subject to the operation of section 10 (in relation to secondary publishers) 
or the neutral reporting without adoption public interest defence (s 4(3)). It is no defence that defendant was 
39
17. Defamation
Page 24 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
simply repeating what someone else said. However, a person will not usually be liable for another’s voluntary 
republication of the original publication unless: (a) they have authorised the repetition or intended that the 
statement 
↵
be repeated (e.g. by speaking at a press conference); or (b) the person who repeated the 
statement was under a legal or moral duty to do so; or (c) the republication is, on the facts, reasonably 
foreseeable (Slipper v BBC [1991]).
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-17-5>.
17.6  Defences
The tort of defamation is framed very broadly. A claimant may sue in respect of any statement which might 
cause right-thinking people to think less of them and that is likely to cause them serious harm, irrespective 
of fault on the part of the defendant, whether or not the statement was intended to refer to the claimant, and 
—subject to a few exceptions—they can sue anyone who played a role in its publication. Liability is limited 
through the operation of a number of defences specific to defamation: truth, absolute and qualified privilege, 
honest opinion and responsible publication on a matter of public interest. In addition, there are also rules 
relating to the operators of websites and the defendant may, in certain circumstances, choose to apologise 
and make an offer of amends—rather than fight the action through the courts.40 We shall look at each of 
these in turn.
17.6.1  Truth
Not all defamatory statements are untrue. Calling a thief a thief may damage their reputation but this is 
hardly something the thief can complain about. Unsurprisingly, therefore, it has long been the case that 
establishing the truth of a defamatory statement is a defence in defamation: ‘the law will not permit a man to 
recover damages in respect of an injury to a character which he does not or ought not possess’ (McPherson v 
Daniels [1829] at 272).41
Section 2 of the Defamation Act 2013 put the common law truth defence (sometimes referred to as 
justification) on a statutory footing (replacing the common law). It applies to statements of fact, not opinion. 
The motive of the defendant is irrelevant, as is whether the statement is in the public interest. In order to rely 
on the defence, the defendant needs to show that the imputation of the statement is ‘substantially true’. The 
burden of proof rests on the defendant to demonstrate that it is more likely than not that the statement was 
substantially true in the meaning that it bore.42 It is not necessary, however, for the defendant to 
demonstrate that everything they said was true. This reflects the position at common law: 
↵
‘the 
defendant does not have to prove that every word he/she published was true. He/she has to establish the 
“essential” or “substantial” truth of the sting of the libel’ (Brooke LJ, Chase v News Group Newspapers Ltd 
[2002] at [34]).
p. 504
40
41
42
p. 505
17. Defamation
Page 25 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
However, identifying the ‘sting’ of the defamation—the imputation of the statement—can be tricky. What 
matters is whether the defamation of the defendant can be shown to be true, not whether the statement can 
be shown to be true in some other sense or for some other purpose. For example, in Newstead the statement 
about Harold Newstead was true of the other Harold Newstead but not the claimant. Similarly, in Lewis v Daily 
Telegraph the paper accurately reported that the company was being investigated for fraud. For the defence to 
succeed, it was not enough to show that there was indeed such an investigation, nor was it necessary to show 
that the claimant had indeed been fraudulent. Rather, what needed to be shown to be true was that right- 
thinking people would assume that the claimant had conducted his affairs in such a way as to raise a 
suspicion of fraud.43
Where a number of defamatory statements have been made the claimant may choose only to sue in relation 
to one. Here it seems likely that, as in the common law, the defendant will not be able to defend themselves by 
establishing the truth of the other claims: ‘it is no defence to a charge that “you called me A” to say “Yes, but I 
also called you B on the same occasion, and that was true”’ (Brooke LJ, Cruise (and Kidman) v Express 
Newspapers [1999] at 954). Though the defendant may seek to argue that together the various statements had 
a common ‘sting’ and that the ‘sting’ is true (Khashoggi v IPC Magazines Ltd [1986]).
This was one of the issues in the much-discussed Depp II v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2020]. Billed as the 
libel trial of the century (though Vardy v Rooney [2022] may challenge that title), it adds little to the legal 
development of libel law, but is nonetheless a useful example of where the truth defence has been successfully 
used.
Depp II v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2020] EWHC 2911 (QB)
Johnny Depp, an American actor, sued the publisher and author of an article which made several 
allegations that Depp had been violent towards his ex-wife, actor Amber Heard, during their 
relationship. Though there was some disagreement as to meaning, it was common ground that the 
natural and ordinary meaning of the words complained of was that ‘(i) the claimant had committed 
physical violence against Ms Heard; (ii) this had caused her to suffer significant injury; and (iii) on 
occasion it caused Ms Heard to fear for her life’ (at [80]–[81]). Without an effective defence, the 
articles were clearly defamatory (at [585]).
After a 14-day trial conducted during the coronavirus pandemic, in which both Depp and Heard gave 
evidence in person, Nicol J reviewed each incident before ‘stepping back’ to consider the evidence ‘in a 
more global sense’ (at [108]). He found that 12 of the 14 incidents of assault raised at trial were 
proven, with the result that the defendants had ‘established the substantial truth of the words that 
they published in the meanings which I have held those words to bear’ (at [575]).
↵
In March 2021, the Court of Appeal refused Depp’s request to present future evidence or appeal 
on the basis that neither had a real prospect of success (Depp II v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2021]). 
He was ordered to make an initial payment towards costs of £630,000.44
43
p. 506
44
17. Defamation
Page 26 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Pause for reflection
Nicol J’s judgment was welcomed by Refuge and other women’s organisations as sending a ‘powerful 
message’:
Every single survivor of domestic abuse should be listened to and should be heard. No 
survivor should ever have her voice silenced. A common tactic used by perpetrators of 
domestic abuse is to repeatedly tell victims that no one will believe them—and to use power 
and control to try and silence them. What we have seen today is that power, fame and 
financial resources cannot be used to silence women. That is a welcome message for 
survivors of domestic abuse around the world.45
However, beyond the Hollywood cast, extensive media coverage and eye-watering costs, at its heart 
Depp is yet another case involving a rich, powerful man seeking to harness the might of defamation 
law to silence a victim-survivor of domestic abuse. As others have noted:
In this case, the defendants were able to rely Ms Heard’s evidence of the abuse she endured in 
her marriage to Mr Depp. Without Ms Heard’s participation, a [section] 2 truth defence was 
unlikely to succeed. Not all victims of domestic abuse will be so willing to have their private 
lives forensically examined in a courtroom by lawyers and available to be reported in the 
press and on social media.46
For some (many?) victim-survivors it is likely that this—understandably—will be too high a price to 
pay.
While the onus is on the defendant to prove that the sting of a defamatory statement is true (the claimant 
only needs to show that the statement was defamatory, not that it was untrue), pursuing an action in 
defamation for something you know to be true, on the assumption that the defendant will be unable to prove 
it, is often a dangerous ploy—as Oscar Wilde, Jonathan Aitken, Neil Hamilton, Jeffrey Archer, Johnny Depp 
and more recently Rebekah Vardy have learnt to their cost. Even if they are successful, and that is not always 
the case, it’s unlikely 
↵
that they will leave court completely vindicated. They may have been awarded 
substantial damages, but they will not have proved that the statement was false—simply that the defendant 
has been unable to produce sufficient evidence to prove the truth of the allegation. Given the additional 
damage a prolonged court case may do to their reputation, it’s not always clear whether it is worth the risk.
45
46
p. 507
17. Defamation
Page 27 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Counterpoint
In Serafin v Malkiewicz and others [2017] Jay J commented:
The claimant observed somewhat wistfully towards the conclusion of the trial that had he 
anticipated what was entailed, he would not have brought this claim in the first place. … It is 
… [perhaps] a modern morality tale: a cautionary warning that litigation of this sort, having 
regard to the nature of the issues at stake, should not be initiated out of almost unbounded 
self-confidence and lack of judgment, coupled with a misplaced belief that the court will 
surely succumb to the same charm and eloquence that has worked so effectively in the world 
outside. (at [354])47
Rebekah Vardy may well have thought much the same thing.
Vardy v Rooney [2022]—known as the ‘Wagatha Christie’ case—has been the subject of numerous 
newspaper articles, podcasts, TV dramas and documentaries and even a West End stage show.48 
Rebekah Vardy and Coleen Rooney are well-known media and television personalities, both married 
to former England football players. Vardy v Rooney revolved around an Instagram post by Rooney, a 
public figure, stating that her former friend, Vardy, had leaked private stories about Rooney and her 
family to the press in return for payment—a claim which Vardy denied, but which Steyn J found to be 
‘substantially true’ (at [287]). Rooney did not seek any compensation; however in October 2022, 
Vardy was ordered to pay up to £1.5 million of Rooney’s legal fees.
↵
But why did Vardy decide to sue? After all, Rooney reportedly offered to settle the case three 
times before it went to trial. Given the way things turned out, it’s hard to resist the conclusion of Jim 
Waterson in The Guardian that ‘not only did Vardy voluntarily bring a libel case that destroyed her 
own reputation, she will also have paid millions of pounds for the privilege of being publicly 
humiliated’.49
But we should. As David Allen Green notes:
judgments can seem one more one-sided than the reality of the case. If Vardy’s case was 
inherently weak then it would not require a 75-page judgment with 290 paragraphs. In the 
end, the judge went with Rooney’s case on each disputed point—but had some of those 
points gone differently Rooney may have failed in her defence—and it was for Rooney to 
prove her defence, and not for Vardy to disprove it. Despite the PR disaster of the hearing for 
Vardy, it was not obvious that Vardy would lose until the judgment was handed down.50
Why did she do it? We will never really know for sure. But what we can say is that Rebekah Vardy has 
joined Johnny Depp, Oscar Wilde and others in finding that, whatever the result, pursuing a 
defamation claim can be a double-edged sword.
47
48 
p. 508
49
50
17. Defamation
Page 28 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(1)
(2)
(3)
17.6.2  Privilege
The defence of privilege allows people to speak and, crucially, publish without fear of defamation proceedings 
in circumstances where it is important that people are able to speak freely. In such situations—described as 
‘privileged’—freedom of expression takes priority over an individual’s right to protect their reputation.
The defence of privilege comes in two forms: absolute and qualified. Absolute privilege covers situations 
where it is crucial that people are able to speak with complete freedom. In such circumstances, it is not 
possible to bring a claim in defamation, however outrageous or false the statement and however malicious 
the speaker. In contrast, qualified privilege only protects the maker of a defamatory statement who speaks 
honestly and without malice.51 Here it falls to the claimant to prove malice, once the privilege has been 
established. Section 7 of the Defamation Act 2013 extends the circumstances in which both forms of the 
defence can be used.
17.6.2.1  Absolute privilege
Where the defence of absolute privilege operates it ensures that no action can be taken against a person who 
makes a defamatory statement. Key situations which are absolutely privileged include:
parliamentary proceedings, including statements in Parliament and in reports published by 
Parliament;
contemporaneous reports of judicial proceedings;
court proceedings—including those before the UK and international domestic courts, the Court of 
Justice of the European Union, the ECtHR and UN international tribunals.
No statement in Parliament has ever led to liability in court: ‘the freedom of speech and debate or proceedings 
in Parliament ought not to be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament’ (Article 9 of 
the Bill of Rights 1688). This means that anything said in either House (statements made by parliamentarians 
outside the House are not privileged)—however ludicrous or false—is absolutely privileged and, as such, 
cannot give rise to a claim in defamation.52
17.6.2.2  Qualified privilege
Qualified privilege is much wider in scope than absolute privilege. It offers a defence:
on an occasion where the person who makes a communication has an interest or duty, legal, social 
or moral, to make it to the person to whom it is made, and the person to whom it is made has a 
corresponding interest or duty to receive it. The reciprocity is essential. (Lord Atkinson, Adam v 
Ward [1917] at 334)
It protects the publisher of a defamatory statement where the defendant is under a duty to communicate the 
relevant information (if it were true) and the recipient has an interest in receiving it. A straightforward 
example is the provision of a reference concerning a prospective employee to his potential employer. Here the 
51
p. 509
52
17. Defamation
Page 29 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
employer has a clear interest in hearing the honest views of the referee as to the qualities and failings of the 
prospective employee. Of course, what this means is that even if the reference turns out to be inaccurate, the 
subject of that reference will have no claim in defamation as long as the referee has acted without malice. 
This meant that traditionally claimants who lost out on jobs because of inaccurate and bad references could 
obtain no remedy in law, unless they could show that the referee had acted dishonestly. However, their 
position has been improved—and the protection afforded by the defence of qualified privilege undercut—by 
recent developments in the tort of negligence (Spring v Guardian Assurance [1995]).
Qualified privilege only applies in situations where the statement is made without malice. A defendant acts 
maliciously, in this context, if they use ‘the occasion … for an indirect or wrong motive’ (Clarke v Molyneux 
[1877])—for instance, if the statement is made with the intention of damaging the claimant’s reputation—or 
where the defendant does not believe that the statement is true, or makes the statement without caring 
whether it is true or not. 
↵
However, where the defendant honestly believes in the truth of the statement 
they are entitled to the protection of qualified privilege however unreasonable or prejudiced the defendant 
was in coming to the conclusion that the statement was true:
In ordinary life it is rare indeed for people to form their beliefs by a process of logical deduction from 
facts ascertained by a rigorous search for all available evidence and a judicious assessment of its 
probative value. In greater or in less degree according to their temperaments, their training, their 
intelligence, they are swayed by prejudice, rely on intuition instead of reasoning, leap to conclusions 
on inadequate evidence and fail to recognise the cogency of material which might cast doubt on the 
validity of the conclusions they reach. But despite the imperfection of the mental process by which 
the belief is arrived at it may still be ‘honest’, that is, a positive belief that the conclusions they have 
reached are true. The law demands no more. (Lord Diplock, Horrocks v Lowe [1975] at 150)
Similarly, while we might be interested in hearing all sorts of idle and frivolous gossip, the question is not 
whether the recipient would be ‘interested’ in receiving the information, it is whether the recipient has ‘an 
interest’ in receiving such information which is sufficiently strong that the law should protect the maker of 
the statement even if the information is wrong, as long as they do not act maliciously.
In Watt v Longsdon [1930], for example, the defendant, a company director, received information suggesting 
that the claimant, who was employed overseas, was acting immorally and dishonestly and, in particular, that 
he was misbehaving with women. Without waiting for the information to be verified, the defendant informed 
the chairman of the company and the employee’s wife. The information was not true, and the claimant sued. 
The Court of Appeal held that although the defendant’s communication of the information to the chairman of 
the company was privileged (there being a common interest in the affairs of company), this privilege did not 
attach to his telling the employee’s wife. While she may have been ‘interested’ in knowing the information, 
the company director was under no duty to tell her—which is to say that the public interest in wives learning 
of their husband’s ‘misbehaviour’ is not sufficiently great as to merit the protection of qualified privilege.53
p. 510
53
17. Defamation
Page 30 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Peer-reviewed statement in scientific or academic journal
Section 6 of the Defamation Act 2013 introduces an entirely new category of qualified privilege, that of a ‘peer 
reviewed statement in a scientific or academic journal etc’. This is aimed at facilitating academic debate and 
its introduction is likely due to a small number of cause célèbre cases which were influential in the campaigns 
surrounding the enactment of the new Act, most notably British Chiropractic Association v Singh [2010] in 
which the British Chiropractic Association sued Singh, a journalist, for critical statements made in a 
newspaper article. Though this action was ultimately unsuccessful (see the discussion in section 17.6.4.1), it 
was a stark example of the difficulties individuals may face in defending defamation claims. The defence only 
applies to statements relating to scientific or academic matter (s 6(2)), that have been independently peer- 
reviewed by the editor of the 
↵
journal and one or more experts (s 6(3)).54 Where such statements are 
privileged, ‘the publication of a fair and accurate copy of, extract from or summary of the statement or 
assessment is also privileged’ (s 6(5)). As with all forms of qualified privilege, the defence is defeated by 
malice (s 6(6)).
The defence was considered in Harcombe v Associated Newspapers [2022] which involved a series of articles 
published by the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday about the use of statins (a drug used to lower cholesterol levels 
in blood), including one with the headline ‘The Deadly Propaganda of Statin Deniers’. The publishers sought 
to defend the case brought by two doctors using the section 4, publication in matter of public interest, defence 
and section 6. While Nicklin J dismissed the section 4 defence, he upheld the section 6 defence in respect of 
certain passages in the articles that referred to scientific papers published by the London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine. Nicklin J continued:
what might deserve the adjective ‘absurd’ would be for Parliament to have provided a new defence of 
qualified privilege for statements published in peer‑reviewed scientific journals, but then to limit 
that privilege only to the original publisher(s); thereby leaving any wider discussion of these 
statements without any protection. As is clear from statements made by promoters of the bill, the 
Government intended s 6 to protect and encourage ‘robust and open scientific debate’; an open 
debate where all people ‘should be at liberty to debate a subject without fear or favour’. Statements 
published in peer-reviewed academic or scientific journals do not generally represent such a debate, 
they inform, contribute to, or stimulate that debate. The safeguards provided in the section, before 
privilege attaches to the relevant journal publication, were regarded by the Government as sufficient 
to ensure that the relevant publication would be ‘responsible’ (i.e. deserving of protection). In other 
words, having established the academic or scientific value of the statement, its publication to the 
wider public should be privileged, and thereafter available to contribute to important public debate. 
(at 347)
17.6.3  Publication in a matter of public interest
Section 4 of the Defamation Act 2013 introduces an entirely new defence of ‘publication in a matter of public 
interest’. It is based on—though also abolishes (by virtue of s 4(6))—the so-called Reynolds defence, which 
itself was a development of qualified privilege in the case of Reynolds v Times Newspapers [2001].
p. 511
54
17. Defamation
Page 31 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Reynolds v Times Newspapers [2001] 2 AC 127 (HL)
Libel proceedings were brought against the Sunday Times for an article suggesting that Albert 
Reynolds, the former Prime Minister of the Republic of Ireland, had misled the Irish Parliament. The 
article made no attempt to put his side of the story. Reynolds sued in defamation and The Times 
argued that it was protected by qualified privilege.
In the House of Lords, the defendants argued that the common law should recognise a separate 
category of qualified privilege for ‘political information’ covering all reporting of such matters, except 
where motivated by malice. This was unanimously rejected by the court, with the 
↵
majority 
holding that the existing protection provided by the defences of privilege and honest comment was 
adequate when dealing with matters of public interest and it would be wrong to single out political 
debate from other matters of public importance.
The appeal therefore failed. Though there was a public interest in the reasons for the claimant’s 
resignation, it was not established that the public interest in the particular story published by the 
defendants, given how it was presented, was such as to attract the protection of qualified privilege: 
‘[t]he publisher must show that the publication was in the public interest and he does not do this by 
merely showing that the subject matter was of public interest’ (Lord Hobhouse at 239).
Though the defendant newspaper lost in Reynolds it nonetheless marked a significant shift in the law of 
defamation in favour of media freedom most notably through Lord Nicholls’s ‘responsible journalism’ test in 
which he listed ten (non-exhaustive) factors to be taken into account when determining whether publication 
of the relevant information is in the public interest and hence whether the defence of qualified privilege will 
be available. He held that, when balancing the competing interests of an individual in protecting their 
reputation against freedom of expression, the court should take into account the following factors:
p. 512
17. Defamation
Page 32 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1. The seriousness of the allegation. The more serious the charge, the more the public is 
misinformed and the individual harmed, if the allegation is not true. 2. The nature of the 
information, and the extent to which the subject matter is a matter of public concern. 3. The source 
of the information. Some informants have no direct knowledge of the events. Some have their own 
axes to grind, or are being paid for their stories. 4. The steps taken to verify the information. 5. The 
status of the information. The allegation may have already been the subject of an investigation 
which commands respect. 6. The urgency of the matter. News is often a perishable commodity. 7. 
Whether comment was sought from the plaintiff. He may have information others do not possess or 
have not disclosed. An approach to the plaintiff will not always be necessary. 8. Whether the article 
contained the gist of the plaintiff’s side of the story. 9. The tone of the article. A newspaper can raise 
queries or call for an investigation. It need not adopt allegations as statements of fact. 10. The 
circumstances of the publication, including the timing …
The weight to be given to these and any other relevant factors will vary from case to case … In 
general, a newspaper’s unwillingness to disclose the identity of its sources should not weigh against 
it. Further, it should always be remembered that journalists act without the benefit of the clear light 
of hindsight. Matters which are obvious in retrospect may have been far from clear in the heat of the 
moment. Above all, the court should have particular regard to the importance of freedom of 
expression. The press discharges vital functions as a bloodhound as well as a watchdog. The court 
should be slow to conclude that a publication was not in the public interest and, therefore, the public 
had no right to know, especially when the information is in the field of political discussion. Any 
lingering doubts should be resolved in favour of publication. (at 205)
Pause for reflection
As early as 2002, the Master of the Rolls, in Loutchansky v Times Newspapers Ltd (No 2) [2002], 
suggested that ‘Reynolds privilege’ is ‘a different jurisprudential creature from the traditional form of 
privilege from which it sprang’ (at 806). This was endorsed by Lord Hoffmann 
↵
and Baroness 
Hale in Jameel v Wall Street Journal Europe [2007], who suggested ‘[i]t might more appropriately be 
called the Reynolds public interest defence rather than privilege’ (Lord Hoffmann at 46).
Traditional forms of privilege attach to the occasion on which the statement is made. These are 
occasions marked out by a reciprocity of duty (on the part of the maker of the statement) and interest 
(on the part of its recipient)—such as statements made in court, the provision of references and so on. 
The privilege then attaches to any statements made on such occasions, unless in turn that privilege 
was abused by demonstrating malice on the part of the defendant. As such, there is, as Lord Hoffmann 
described it, a ‘two-stage process’ (at [50]): first, we ask if the statement was made on a privileged 
occasion; and, secondly, if so, we ask whether that privilege is defeated by the defendant’s malice.
p. 513
17. Defamation
Page 33 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
By contrast, the defence outlined in Reynolds works differently. Here what is privileged is not the 
occasion on which the statement is made but the material that is communicated. And whether this 
material is privileged depends not simply on the occasion on which the statement is made, but also on 
the contents of the statement and the conduct of the parties in publishing this material in that form. 
Accordingly, there is no need for a separate inquiry into the possibility of the privilege being removed 
on the basis of the defendant’s malice since ‘the propriety of the conduct of the defendant is built into 
the conditions under which the material is privileged’ (at [46]).
In transplanting the new public interest defence as a separate defence away from its roots in qualified 
privilege, section 4 brings with it the possibility of some much needed conceptual clarity to both 
defences.55 Though the break might not be as clean as we might have hoped.
Parliament’s intention in section 4 was to essentially ‘codify’ and ‘reflect’ the current common law defence as 
developed from Reynolds and affirmed by the Supreme Court in Flood v Times Newspapers [2012]. The test 
mirrors the common law, incorporating ‘both a subjective element—what the defendant believed was in the 
public interest at the time of publication—and an objective element—whether the belief was a reasonable one 
for the defendant to hold in all the circumstances’.56 And so ‘public interest’ is used in different ways in each 
limb of 
↵
the test. In the first, it is directed to the subject matter of the statement—was it a matter of 
public interest? While in the second it goes to whether, in all the circumstances, it was in the public interest 
for the defamatory statement to be published.57
Surprisingly, perhaps, ‘public interest’ is not defined in the Act, though section 4(2) requires the court when 
determining whether the defence has been made out to ‘have regard to all the circumstances of the case’, 
subject to the conditions relating to ‘reportage’ (s 4(3)) and ‘editorial discretion’ (s 4(4)). Section 4(3) makes 
it clear that when determining whether the defamatory statement is on a matter of public interest, the 
statement may be considered on its own or in the wider context of the article or document in which it was 
published, thereby incorporating the common law doctrine of ‘reportage’ (see e.g. Roberts v Gamble [2007]), 
which allows for the disregarding of a defendant’s failure to verify the truth of the imputation behind the 
statement where it is presented as, or forms part of, ‘an accurate and impartial account of a dispute to which 
the claimant was a party’. Section 4(4) requires the court ‘when determining whether it was reasonable for 
the defendant to believe that publishing the statement complained of was in the public interest … [to] make 
such allowance for editorial judgment as it considers appropriate’.
Of course, exercising editorial judgement is not limited to newspaper editors. Nevertheless, the purpose of 
section 4(4) is to expressly recognise the importance of editorial judgement and discretion as affirmed in 
Flood (decided as the draft Defamation Bill was before Parliament), in which the Supreme Court agreed with 
Lord Hoffmann’s observation in Jameel v Wall Street Journal Europe [2007] that the intention of Reynolds was 
to promote ‘greater freedom for the press to publish stories of genuine public interest’ (Lord Brown at [118]) 
and the role of editors in setting boundaries around this:
55
56
p. 514
57
17. Defamation
Page 34 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The courts … give weight to the judgment of journalist and editors not merely as to the nature and 
degree of the steps to be taken before publishing the material, but also as to the content of the 
material to be published in the public interest. The courts must have the last word in setting the 
boundaries of what can properly be regarded as acceptable journalism, but within those boundaries 
the judgment of responsible journalists and editors merits respect. (Lord Mance, Flood at [137])
An early case on the application of section 4 was Barron v Vines [2016], in which two Labour MPs brought a 
defamation claim against a UKIP counsellor who alleged during a Sky News interview that they knew for 
years of the large-scale sexual abuse of children in Rotherham, and that they were still failing to ensure the 
perpetrators were brought to justice. Finding for the claimants, Warby J offered a ‘tentative and provisional 
view’ on potential application of the defence that ‘a reasonable belief that it is in the public interest to make 
statement A could be the basis for the defence, even if the words used unintentionally convey meaning B’ (at 
[63]).58 He explored this further in Economou v de Freitas [2018].
Economou v de Freitas [2018] EWCA Civ 2591 (CA)
The claimant, Alexander Economou, was the ex-boyfriend of Eleanor de Freitas, the late daughter of 
the defendant. Ms de Freitas had accused Economou of raping her. Economou was arrested but not 
charged. Eight months later, he brought a private prosecution (which the CPS subsequently took 
over) against Ms de Freitas claiming she had sought to pervert the course of justice by falsely 
accusing him of rape. Four days before the trial started, Ms de Freitas, who suffered from bipolar 
affective disorder, committed suicide. Mr de Freitas wanted the inquest into his daughter’s death 
expanded to include an examination of the role of the CPS. He was advised to raise the issues publicly, 
which he did, authoring—or authorising to be written—seven articles. It is these articles which 
formed the basis of Economou’s claim.
At first instance, Warby J held that only two of the seven articles were actionable (the others failing to 
meet the ‘serious harm’ threshold) and that the public interest defence was made out in relation to all 
of them. The central issue was not simply whether the articles raised issues of public importance 
(which they did), but whether Mr de Freitas ‘reasonably believed that the publication of the particular 
statement was in the public interest’. Referring extensively to Reynolds, Warby J concluded:
I would consider a belief to be reasonable for the purposes of s 4 only if it is one arrived at 
after conducting such enquiries and checks as it is reasonable to expect of the particular 
defendant in all the circumstances of the case. Among the circumstances relevant to the 
question of what enquiries and checks are needed, the subject-matter needs consideration, 
as do the particular words used, the range of meanings the defendant ought reasonably to 
have considered they might convey, and the particular role of the defendant in question. (at 
[241])
58
p. 515
17. Defamation
Page 35 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
In addition, Mr de Freitas’s role was ‘closer to that of a source or contributor than that of a 
journalist’ (at [242]). As such, it would be ‘wrong in principle’ to require him to undertake inquiries 
expected of a journalist (at [246]).59
The Court of Appeal rejected the claimant’s argument that Warby J had effectively conferred 
‘contributor immunity’ on the defendant. Recognising that the case raised difficult and important 
↵
issues of free speech on the one hand, and reputation on the other, Sharp LJ reaffirmed the 
importance of Reynolds when assessing the reasonableness of the defendant’s belief.
Section 4 requires the court to have regard to all the circumstances of the case when 
determining the all-important question arising under section 4(1)(b) … In my judgment, all 
the circumstances of the case must include the sort of factors carefully identified by the 
judge, including, importantly, the particular role of the defendant in question. The statute 
could have made reference to the Reynolds factors in this connection, but it did not do so. 
That is not to say however, that the matters identified in the non-exhaustive checklist may 
not be relevant to the outcome of a public interest defence, or that, on the facts of the 
individual case, the failure to comply with one or some of the factors, may not tell decisively 
against a defendant. However, even under the Reynolds regime, as Lord Nicholls made clear, 
the weight to be given to those factors, and any other relevant factors, would vary from case 
to case. As with Reynolds therefore, with its emphasis on practicality and flexibility, all will 
depend on the facts. (at [110])
Pause for reflection
What is clear from Economou v de Freitas is that ‘mere contributors’ (and by extension bloggers and 
others who have not practised traditional journalism) will not be held to the same standards as 
professional journalists in order to qualify for the public interest defence.60 Do you think this strikes a 
fair balance between freedom of expression and the protection of an individual’s reputation? Should 
where—and by whom—the defamatory statement is published make a difference? After all, as Lord 
Hobhouse stated in Reynolds ‘No public interest is served by publishing or communicating 
misinformation’ (at 128). Indeed, as Sharp LJ noted in Economou v de Freitas:
59
p. 516
60
17. Defamation
Page 36 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
The implications of the publication of false information are, if anything, more serious now 
than they were when Reynolds was decided. The fact that information is present on the 
Internet, gives it permanence and reach, which may have profound implications for the life 
and future prospects of the person defamed. A successful public interest defence leaves a 
claimant whose reputation is damaged without vindication, damages or the ability to obtain 
injunctive relief … It might also be said, that in an era of distrust and ‘fake news’, it is more 
important than ever that the public should, so far as possible, be put in the picture as to 
where the truth, or some approximation of it, lies. (at [109])61
↵
Following Economou v de Freitas, two other cases have considered the application of section 4 in a non- 
journalist context. Both involved allegations of serious sexual misconduct. In Hay v Creswell [2023], the 
defendant published allegations stating that the claimant had violently sexually assaulted her. Not only did 
the judge find the allegations to be substantially true, but also it was found that the section 4 defence was 
made out:
The defendant was writing from her own first-hand knowledge and experience. There were no other 
checks or inquiries that standards of reasonableness required her to conduct to verify the 
information that she proposed to publish before she did so … she has shown that: the statements 
complained of were on a matter of public interest; that she believed this to be the case at the time of 
publishing them; and that her belief was reasonable in all the circumstances. (Williams J at [210], 
[215])
In Aaronson v Stones [2023], the defendant posted a number of tweets and featured in a YouTube video 
alleging that the claimant was a serial rapist. Both worked (or had worked) in the adult entertainment 
industry in the US. The defendant sought to argue that his defamatory claims were on a matter of public 
interest and made in the public interest. In particular, he stated that there was a broader public interest in 
‘speaking out about racism, sexual violence and harassment in order to be able to end impunity and prevent 
future violence, abuse and harassment’, especially in light of the #MeToo movement and ‘the historic 
prejudice and discrimination against adult sex performers in the policing of sexual abuse’ (at [40]). The judge 
held that while ‘discussion of rape and sexual abuse (or abuse in general) in any industry will likely be a 
matter of public interest’, this was not the case here. Rather, the statements amounted to ‘public accusations 
of rape against a named individual’ (at [344]):
Viewed objectively … they were little more than a public, specific and targeted attack on the claimant; 
the allegations were not, for example, contextualised as illustrative examples of a generally 
recognised problem of rape and abuse in the adult entertainment industry. (Knowles J at [345])
61
p. 517
17. Defamation
Page 37 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Nor, suggested Knowles J (referring to but not applying the Reynolds checklist), was there any attempt made 
to verify the story (at [395]) or to put it to the claimant (at [407]). The claimant was awarded £110,000 in 
damages, which included an amount for aggravation in recognition of the fact that the claimant had been 
subjected to ‘a campaign of defamation of an extremely serious type which directly impacted upon many 
aspects of the claimant’s life, including his reputation; his business; and his mental well-being’ (at [434]).
But what about more ‘responsible’ journalists? Here too defendants found it difficult to make out the defence. 
The bar is set high. The section 4 defence failed when Bruno Lachaux (the claimant in Lachaux v Independent 
Print Ltd [2019]) returned to court in July 2021. Nicklin J was clear in his view:
Fundamentally, I have no hesitation in finding that it was not in the public interest to publish the … 
[articles], which contained allegations that were seriously defamatory of the claimant, without 
having given him an opportunity to respond to them. The decision not to contact the claimant was 
not a result of any careful editorial consideration, it was a mistake that was belatedly recognised, but 
not corrected, prior to publication. (Lachaux v Independent Print Ltd [2020] at [190])
↵
It is the publisher’s responsibility, if they are wanting later to rely on section 4, to ensure that accurate 
notes and records are kept. He continued:
journalists and those in professional publishing organisations should be able to demonstrate, not 
only that they reasonably believed that publication would be in the public interest, but also how and 
with whom this was established at the time … Of course, the Court has no power to require a 
journalist—or any other professional—to maintain records. But, as the burden of establishing a 
public interest defence under s 4 Defamation Act 2013 lies upon the defendant, a defendant seeking 
to prove that s/he reasonably believed that publishing the statement complained of was in the public 
interest is likely to find that the prospects of success are enhanced by being able to produce 
contemporaneous records of the decision(s) taken. (at [120], [122])
Certainly, the comprehensiveness and rigour of journalist Carole Cadwalladr’s research and record keeping 
was a key component in her reliance on the public interest defence in Banks v Cadwalladr [2023].
Banks v Cadwalladr [2023] EWCA Civ 219 (CA)
Arron Banks is a high-profile businessman and was the main funder of the Leave.EU campaign. 
During a TED (technology, entertainment and design) talk in 2019 titled ‘Facebook’s role in Brexit— 
and the threat to democracy’, Cadwalladr made the following comment: ‘And I am not even going to 
get into the lies that Arron Banks has told about his covert relationship with the Russian 
Government’. She later tweeted a link to the talk with a further comment: ‘Oh Arron. This is too 
p. 518
17. Defamation
Page 38 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
tragic. Nigel Farage’s secret funder Arron Banks has sent me a pre-action letter this morning: he’s 
suing me over this TED talk. If you haven’t watched it please do. I say he lied about his contact with 
the Russian govt. Because he did’.
Banks sued Cadwalladr in defamation. The meaning of both comments was held by Saini J, in a 
previous trial to determine the meaning, to be ‘On more than one occasion Mr Banks told untruths 
about a secret relationship he had with the Russian government in relation to acceptance of foreign 
funding of electoral campaigns in breach of the law on such funding’ (at [6]). A National Crime 
Agency/Electoral Commission investigation into the matter had cleared Mr Banks of any wrongdoing 
and so, as a result, Cadwalladr did not contend that this meaning was true and had stated that 
unequivocally to Banks in a letter of apology. Rather, she sought to rely on the defence in section 4: 
that the publication was a matter of public interest. The trial judge found that the TED talk was 
defamatory, but in the public interest (notwithstanding the fact that people could still view it after the 
publication of the National Crime Agency/Electoral Commission investigation). Cadwalladr believed 
that publishing the statement was in the public interest and this belief was reasonable. The latter 
point was supported by the lengthy and extensive investigations Cadwalladr had carried out leading 
up to the TED talk.62
↵
The Court of Appeal disagreed. Commenting on the application of section 4, Warby LJ stated:
a public interest defence, once established, does not necessarily endure for ever. A defendant 
has to show that at the time of each and every publication, he or she continued to believe that 
it was in the public interest to publish the statement and that this belief remained reasonable 
when those particular publications were made. The approach is a granular one. The public 
interest defence is not available in respect of publications made after the defendant ceases to 
hold the belief in question or such a belief ceases to be reasonable. By parity of reasoning, and 
for the purposes of consistency and fairness, a claimant cannot succeed in establishing 
liability in respect of publications which do not cause serious harm, because there is some 
other publication that does, or because serious harm is caused by the ‘publication’ taken as a 
whole. Likewise, it would be unprincipled to treat serious harm caused by conduct which is 
not actionable because a defence has been made out as a sufficient reason to grant a remedy 
in respect of other conduct which, viewed in isolation, is not harmful enough to justify this.
The assessment of whether the defamatory statement had caused the claimant ‘serious harm’ had to 
be made again, once the section 4 defence fell away. Warby LJ continued:
62
p. 519
17. Defamation
Page 39 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
[the] publication of the TED Talk after 29 April 2020 [the date the National Crime Agency/ 
Electoral Commission investigation published its report] caused serious harm to the 
reputation of the claimant. There was little direct evidence of harm, but as the [trial] judge 
held this was ‘unsurprising’ given the well-known difficulties of obtaining such evidence. … 
This was, as the judge also held, ‘a serious talk on a serious subject’ given by ‘an award- 
winning journalist’ on an ‘authoritative and credible international platform’. In these 
circumstances the inference that serious harm was caused flows from the inherent gravity of 
the allegation and its natural tendency to cause serious reputational harm, coupled with the 
judge’s own findings as to the scale of publication in this phase, taken at its lowest. (Warby J 
at [67])
Warby LJ also rejected the ‘echo chamber’ argument—whereby most of the publishees were people 
who already disliked or had a generally low opinion of the claimant—as ‘irrelevant’ to the 
determination of serious harm (at [7]).63
17.6.4  Honest opinion
Section 3 replaces the common law defence of honest or fair comment with the statutory defence of honest 
opinion. As Sharp LJ notes in Butt v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019], ‘the defence of 
honest opinion, or fair comment as it was known at common law, has long been regarded as an essential part 
of the protection afforded to freedom of expression in this jurisdiction’ (at [25]). Unlike in the common law 
defence, there is no need for the statement to be on a matter of public opinion, nor does it depend on malice.
17.6.4.1  An opinion not fact …
There is a fine line between a comment on facts as opposed to a statement of fact and to suggest that 
comment is restricted to statements of opinion risks oversimplification. A basic rule of thumb is that facts are 
simply descriptive, whereas comments and opinions are evaluative. So to say, for example, that the ninth 
edition of this book has 21 chapters is a statement of fact; to say that it is the best yet (which of course may be 
true!) is a statement of opinion. The veracity of statements of fact is not dependent on the perspectives and 
values of the person who makes the statement: there is in such cases a fact of the matter, and this is the case 
even if people disagree over what this is. By contrast, opinions are necessarily dependent on an individual’s 
values and preferences.
Though sound in principle, drawing this distinction in practice can be difficult. Indeed, the courts have on 
occasion suggested that the same statement could be either a statement of fact or a statement of opinion 
depending on the context. A famous example of this was given by Ferguson J in the New South Wales case of 
Myerson v Smith’s Weekly [1923]: ‘To say that a man’s conduct was dishonourable is not a comment, it is a 
statement of fact. To say that he did certain specific things and that his conduct was dishonourable is a 
statement of fact coupled with a comment’. As noted by the Supreme Court in Joseph v Spiller [2010], this 
63
p. 520
17. Defamation
Page 40 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
cannot be right. To say that a man’s conduct was dishonourable is not a simple statement of fact. It is a 
comment coupled with an allegation of unspecified conduct upon which the comment is based. In fact (no 
pun intended), a defamatory comment about a person will almost always be based, either expressly or 
inferentially, on conduct on the part of that person (Lord Phillips at [5]). So, while comments that do not 
identify the conduct on which they are based have sometimes been treated as if they were statements of fact, 
the better view is that they remain statements of opinion.
What is clear, however, is that the defence of honest opinion (as with the common law defence) will not 
succeed in such cases. Instead, only the defence of truth would be open to the defendant, which requires that 
they prove the existence of facts that justify the comment. Singh highlights the difficulties of distinguishing 
fact and opinion.
British Chiropractic Association v Singh [2010] EWCA Civ 350 (CA)
The defendant published a newspaper article containing the following statement:
The British Chiropractic Association claims that their members can treat children with colic, 
sleeping and feeding problems, frequent ear infections, asthma and prolonged crying, even 
though there is not a jot of evidence. This organisation is the respectable face of the 
chiropractic profession and yet it happily promotes bogus treatments.
The British Chiropractic Association sued in libel and the defendant sought to rely on the defence of 
fair comment. The question for the court was whether these were assertions of fact (in which case the 
defence would not be available) or statements of opinion. The trial judge, Eady J, held that they were 
statements of fact, but the Court of Appeal allowed the defendant’s appeal.
Though the words ‘not a jot of evidence’ may be thought to involve a question of fact—either such 
evidence exists or it does not—the court said that the words should be read as meaning there is ‘no 
worthwhile or reliable evidence’. And whether evidence not only exists but is worthwhile is a value 
judgement, and so a matter of opinion. The claim that the treatments were ‘bogus’ was to be 
understood in the same light.
Pause for reflection
↵
Some of the cases have been prepared to treat inferences of fact as amounting to comment for the 
purposes of fair comment, as long as the facts from which the inference is drawn are identified and 
true. An inference of fact is a statement of fact which is drawn (inferred) from other factual material. 
So one might infer from the fact that a married TV presenter has a private dinner with her dance 
p. 521
17. Defamation
Page 41 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
partner a further fact: that they are having an affair. Singh appears to endorse this view, at least 
insofar as we are concerned with scientific or medical matters where the question of what inferences 
(of fact) can be drawn from the available evidence is contested.
The Supreme Court in Joseph v Spiller noted that one possible reform of the common law defence of 
honest comment would be to extend it to inferences of fact. However, Lord Phillips was unconvinced 
by the merits of such a reform:
Some decisions have gone further and treated allegations of verifiable fact as comment … It is 
questionable whether this is satisfactory. Prejudiced commentators can draw honest 
inferences of fact, such as that a man charged with fraud is guilty of fraud. Should the 
defence of fair comment apply to such inferences? Allegations of fact can be far more 
damaging, even if plainly based on inference, than comments on true facts. (at [114])
Do you agree? Is it correct to say that allegations of fact will typically be taken more seriously and 
hence will cause more damage than comments and statements of opinion? Can we maintain the line 
between statements (including inferences) of fact and statements of opinion without severely 
limiting individuals’ freedom to challenge (potentially) bogus scientific claims?
17.6.4.2  … that indicates the basis of the opinion
The defence of honest opinion is available only where the statement is one of opinion rather than fact and the 
facts on which that opinion is based are sufficiently identified, whether in general or specific terms. This 
reflects the test approached by the Supreme Court in Joseph v Spiller.
Joseph v Spiller [2010] UKSC 53 (SC)
The claimants were musicians who had entered into a contract with the defendant booking agency. 
The contract included a ‘re-engagement clause’, which provided that if the claimants were to perform 
at a venue for a second time within a 12-month period, this second booking was to be arranged 
through the defendant. The defendant wrote to the claimants complaining that they had breached 
this clause by arranging a second booking directly with the venue. In their reply by email, the 
claimants wrote: ‘your contract … holds no water in legal terms’. The defendant then posted a notice 
on their website stating that they would no longer accept bookings for the claimants as ‘following a 
breach of contract’ they had advised that ‘the terms and conditions of “contracts hold no water in 
legal terms”’.
17. Defamation
Page 42 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
In response to the claimants’ defamation claim, the defendant pleaded fair comment. The claimants 
applied to have this defence struck out on, among other things, the basis that the facts 
↵
to which 
the comments were directed were not identified with sufficient particularity in the notice on their 
website, since the details of the alleged breach of contract were not specified. The application 
succeeded at first instance and in the Court of Appeal, but not before the Supreme Court.
Giving the leading judgment, Lord Phillips held that for the defence to be available:
the comment [need not] identify the matters on which it is based with sufficient 
particularity to enable the reader to judge for himself whether it was well founded. The 
comment must, however, identify at least in general terms what it is that has led the 
commentator to make the comment, so that the reader can understand what the comment is 
about and the commentator can, if challenged, explain by giving particulars of the subject 
matter of his comment why he expressed the views that he did. A fair balance must be struck 
between allowing a critic the freedom to express himself as he will and requiring him to 
identify to his readers why it is that he is making the criticism. (at [104])
More generally, he noted the need for the defence of fair—or, as the Supreme Court preferred, honest 
—comment to develop to fit modern modes of communication.
Today the internet has made it possible for the man in the street to make public comment 
about others in a manner that did not exist when the principles of the law of fair comment 
were developed, and millions take advantage of that opportunity. Where the comments that 
they make are derogatory it will often be impossible for other readers to evaluate them 
without detailed information about the facts that have given rise to the comments. 
Frequently these will not be set out. If [the defendant were required to provide sufficient 
facts as to enable a reader to judge if the comments are well founded] the defence of fair 
comment will be robbed of much if its efficacy. (at [99])
Lord Walker echoed these sentiments:
The creation of a common base of information shared by those who watch television and use 
the internet has had an effect which can hardly be overstated. Millions now talk, and 
thousands comment in electronically transmitted words, about recent events of which they 
have learned from television or the internet. Many of the events and the comments on them 
are no doubt trivial and ephemeral but from time to time (as the present appeal shows) libel 
law has to engage with them. The test for identifying the factual basis of honest comment 
must be flexible enough to allow for this type of case, in which a passing reference to the 
previous night’s celebrity show would be regarded by most of the public, and may sometimes 
have to be regarded by the law, as a sufficient factual basis. (at [131])
p. 522
17. Defamation
Page 43 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
17.6.4.3  … and could be—and is—honestly held
The defendant must prove that there is a true factual basis to form a sufficient basis for the comment such 
that an honest person could have held the opinion. The defendant need not prove that all the facts on which 
his opinion is based are true, just enough to make it possible to hold the opinion in question.64 This is an 
objective test and asks whether an honest person could have held the opinion either ‘on the basis of any fact 
which existed at the time the 
↵
statement complained of was published’ (s 3(4)(a)), or ‘on the basis of 
anything asserted to be a fact in a privileged statement published before the statement complained of’ (s 3(4) 
(b)). The test then is not one of reasonableness, but rather whether the view is one that an honest person 
might hold. To use Lord Nicholls’s formulation in Tse Wei Chun v Cheng [2001] it asks whether the comment 
was ‘one which could have been made by an honest person, however prejudiced he might be, and however 
exaggerated or obstinate his views’ (at [20]). Thus, while the defendant cannot rely on an honestly held 
opinion if that opinion was based on incorrect facts and there were no other facts which could have supported 
it, it may be possible for the defendant to rely on the defence where the opinion is based on a honest but 
distorted view of the underlying facts or event where an honest person shared their view by reference to facts 
of which the defendant was not aware at the time the defamatory statement was published (and so upon 
which the opinion was not based).
Finally, as with the common law defence, there will be no defence if the defamatory opinion offered by the 
defendant is not an opinion they in fact hold or, where the statement is said by someone other than the 
defendant, where the defendant knew or ought to have known that the author did not hold the opinion.
Honest opinion was applied in Butt v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019].
Butt v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 
933 (CA)
In September 2015 the Home Office published a press release detailing updates to the Government’s 
Prevent duty guidance titled: ‘PM’s Extremist Task Force: Tackling Extremism in Universities and 
Colleges Top of the Agenda’. The claimant, Salman Butt, chief editor of a website called Islam21C, was 
named in a list of guest speakers who had previously spoken at universities and who were ‘on record 
as expressing views contrary to British values’ (at [8]). Butt sued the Home Secretary in defamation 
arguing the natural and ordinary meaning of the words were that he was an extremist hate speaker 
and was likely to radicalise students. At trial Nicol J found that while the natural and ordinary 
meaning of the press release to be that ‘the claimant is an extreme hate speaker who legitimises 
terrorism and from whose pernicious and poisonous influence students should be protected’ and, as 
such, was defamatory, the Home Secretary was able to rely on the defence of honest opinion under 
section 3 of the Defamation Act 2013: ‘… the statement complained of was a statement of opinion; and 
… indicated in general terms the basis of the opinion, namely the views of Dr Butt which were in the 
public domain’ (at [9]). Butt appealed.
64
p. 523
17. Defamation
Page 44 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
(a)
(b)
The question for the Court of Appeal was whether the statement complained of was one of opinion or 
fact. Finding for the Home Office, Sharp LJ held the relevant test to be ‘how the statement would 
strike the ordinary reader’ and that in determining this ‘the subject matter, the nature of the 
allegation and the context of the relevant words may well be important’ (at [39]) before going on to 
conclude that, on this basis, the ordinary reader would understand the statement about Butt in the 
press release to be an evaluative ‘value judgment or expression of opinion’ (at [39]).
In Dyson v MGN Ltd [2023], the defendant had published an article in which it claimed:
the vacuum cleaner tycoon who championed Vote Leave due to the economic opportunities it would 
bring British industry before moving his global head office to Singapore. In other words kids, talk 
the talk, then screw your country, and if anyone complains tell them to suck it up. (at [5])
↵
Nicklin J determined the natural ordinary meaning of the article as follows:
the Claimant had publicly supported the benefits of Brexit to British industry, yet following 
Brexit he had moved the global head office of his business to Singapore. [An allegation of 
fact]
by so doing, the Claimant was a hypocrite who had screwed the country and who set a poor 
moral example to young people. [An expression of opinion]
(Dyson v MGN Ltd [2022] at [21])
The defendant sought to rely on the defence of honest opinion. While ultimately the case failed, on the basis 
that it had not caused the claimant serious harm, the judge considered section 3(4)(a) of the Act. The first 
issue for the court was whether when seeking to make out this defence, the defendant could rely on facts 
other than the single fact mentioned in the article. Jay J held that they could: on the assumption that the fact 
is true, there is ‘no basis for confining a defendant to that bare fact, excluding from account related and 
connected facts’ (at [106]). Nor, Jay J continued, was it necessary for the defendant to include contextual facts 
so long as the omission did not ‘falsify or contradict the basic factual allegation: that Dyson moved part of its 
business out of the jurisdiction’ (at [131]). Finally, in assessing whether an honest commentator could have 
held the opinion expressed in the article, the correct test, as set out by Lord Esher in Merivale v Carson [1887], 
was whether ‘any fair man, however prejudiced he may be, however exaggerated or obstinate his views, 
[would] have said that which this criticism has said of the work which is criticised’ (at [134]). On this basis, 
the defendant’s statement that the claimant’s actions were ‘hypocritical and highly symbolic … [and] could 
undermine the confidence of others in the UK and [is] … a poor moral example to young people’ fell within 
the scope of honest opinion, and the defence was made out (meaning that the claimant was able to rely on it).
p. 524
17. Defamation
Page 45 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-17-6>.
17.7  Distributors, including operators of websites
A distinction is drawn between those who publish and republish defamatory material—authors, editors, 
publishers and so on—and mechanical distributors—those who simply disseminate the material (usually 
booksellers, libraries, newsagents). Section 1 of the Defamation Act 1996 provides the latter with a defence of 
‘innocent defamation’ if he is able to show (1) he was not the author, editor or publisher of the statement 
complained of; (2) he took reasonable care in relation to its publication; and (3) he did not know, or had no 
reason to believe, that what he did caused and contributed to the publication of a defamatory statement.
It extends the defence to ‘mechanical distributors’ to include ‘printers, producers, distributors and sellers of 
material containing the statement’ (s 1(3)(a)) as well as to broadcasters of live programmes where they have 
no effective control over the person making the statement (s 1(3)(d)). The latter claim is comparatively rare. 
Most potentially defamatory programmes are either pre-recorded or, in order to meet the requirement of 
reasonable care (s 1(1)(b)), shown ‘as live’ where transmission is slightly delayed. It also extends to ‘operators 
of or providers of access to a communications system by means of which the statement is 
↵
transmitted, or made available, by a person over whom he has no effective control’ (s 1(3)(e)), that is, 
ISPs or Twitter where the quantity of material means that it may have limited awareness of what is being 
added to the system.
Section 10(1) of the 2013 Act adds a further layer of protection for ‘secondary’ publishers. It states that:
A court does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine an action for defamation brought against a 
person who was not the author, editor, or publisher of the statement complained of unless the court 
is satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable for an action to be brought against the author, editor 
or publisher.
Section 5 of the 2013 Act extends the protection offered to website operators, making it ‘a defence for the 
operator to show that it was not the operator who posted the statement on the website’ (s 5(2)). The defence 
is limited in section 5(3) where (a) it is not possible for the claimant to identify the person who posted the 
statement; (b) the claimant gave the operator a notice of complaint in relation to the statement; and (c) the 
operator failed to respond to the notice in line with the Defamation (Operators of Websites) Regulations 2013. 
The defence is also defeated by malice on the part of the operator (s 5(11)). While the effect of this defence 
means that website operators will not be automatically liable in defamation (even if they moderate 
comments), they may become liable if they do not act in accordance with the regulations and where users use 
pseudonyms (thus preventing the claimant from identifying the poster directly).
p. 525
17. Defamation
Page 46 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-17-7>.
17.8  Offer of amends
Where the defamatory statement is unintentional—for example, where the defendant knows that the 
statement refers to the claimant but honestly and reasonably believes that it is true or where (as in cases of 
mistaken identity described earlier) the defendant never intends to refer to the claimant—the defendant can 
choose to make an offer of amends (usually an apology and correction, and appropriate damages) under 
section 2 of the Defamation Act 1996. An offer of amends is not strictly a defence. Its purpose is not to allow 
the defendant to claim that the defamatory statement was justified or excusable, rather it provides an 
opportunity for the defendant to acknowledge they were wrong and to prevent the claim from going any 
further.
Timing is crucial here. The offer must be made before the service of a defence to the claim; that is, the 
defendant must choose whether they are going to fight the defamation action or admit they were wrong. This 
is to ensure the effectiveness of the apology. As Judge LCJ noted in Cairns v Modi [2012]:
It is virtually self-evident that in most cases publication of a defamatory statement to one person 
will cause infinitely less damage than publication to the world at large, and that publication on a 
single occasion is likely to cause less damage than repeated publication and consequent publicity on 
social media. By the same token, rapid publication of the withdrawal of a defamatory statement, 
accompanied by an apology, together with an admission of its falsity given as wide publicity as the 
original libel diminishes its impact more effectively than an apology extracted after endless 
vacillation while the libel remains in the public domain, unregretted and insidiously achieving 
greater credibility. (at [24])
↵
If the defendant’s offer is accepted, the action stops and damages are agreed by the parties.65 If damages 
cannot be agreed, then damages will be assessed by the court. If the offer is not accepted, the defendant can 
use the fact that the offer was made in their defence (unless the claimant is able to show that the defendant 
knew that the comments referred to the claimant and were false and defamatory) (Defamation Act 1996, s 4).
There are many examples of an offer of amends in practice—see, for example, the Daily Express and Daily 
Star’s front-page apology to the parents of Madeleine McCann for suggestions that they had in some way 
contributed to her death,66 The People’s apology to the father of Baby P, whom the paper had falsely accused 
of being a convicted rapist (Cairns v Modi [2012]), the Metropolitan Police’s apology to a man who was 
wrongly pictured on ‘wanted posters’ following the London Riots in 2011,67 the Daily Telegraph’s apology (and 
payment of ‘substantial damages’) to Melania Trump68 and former MEP Jacqueline Foster’s apology to Melika 
Gorgianeh, a contestant on the BBC quiz show ‘University Challenge’, for suggesting that she had chosen an 
antisemitic symbol as her team’s mascot.69
p. 526
65
66
67
68
69
17. Defamation
Page 47 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
An example where a defendant failed to take up the opportunity of an offer of amends is Monroe v Hopkins 
[2017]. Katie Hopkins, a journalist who then wrote for the MailOnline, posted a tweet which accused Jack 
Monroe, a food blogger and writer, ‘of vandalising a war memorial and desecrating the memory of those who 
fought for her freedom, or of approving or condoning such behaviour’ (at [2]). Following further exchanges 
relating to Hopkins’s original tweet, Monroe tweeted Hopkins saying ‘Dear @KTHopkins, public apology + 
£5k to migrant rescue & I won’t sue. It’ll be cheaper for you and v. satisfying for me’ (at [17]). The offer was 
later repeated in a letter from Monroe’s solicitor. However, it was not taken up. In his concluding comments, 
Warby J, the trial judge, noted: ‘The case could easily have been resolved at an early stage. There was an open 
offer to settle for £5,000. It was a reasonable offer’ (at [83]). Instead, Monroe was awarded £24,000 in 
compensation and costs were reported to be £300,000.70
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-17-8>.
17.9  Remedies: Damages and injunctions
An award of damages is the primary remedy in defamation. The amount of damages awarded in defamation 
cases often appears out of proportion with those awarded for personal injuries. This is partly because an 
action in defamation is one of the few times in tort law where a compensatory award may be supplemented 
by aggravated or 
↵
exemplary damages.71 In Hijazi v Yaxley-Lennon [2021], for example, a schoolboy 
victim of a racist attack72 was falsely and deliberately presented by the defendant, Stephen Yaxley-Lennon 
(also known as Tommy Robinson, a well-known public figure on the political right), in two videos on his 
Facebook account as the violent aggressor after the original video of the attack went viral. The result was 
described by the judge as ‘entirely predictable’ (at [162]). The claimant became the target of abuse, he and his 
family having to leave their home, and the claimant left education. Awarding the claimant £100,000 in 
damages, Nicklin J continued:
The defendant is responsible for this harm, some of the scars of which, particularly the impact on 
the Claimant’s education, are likely to last for many years, if not a lifetime. The most significant 
element of the damages award that I fix will be the need for vindication. This judgment—but more 
importantly—the award of damages will mark clearly that the defendant has failed to demonstrate 
the truth of his allegations. The defendant took on the burden of proving his allegations to be true. 
He has failed. In reality, and for the reasons I have explained, his evidence fell woefully short. He has, 
however, persisted with the serious allegations he originally made, and has even added to them 
during the proceedings. The claimant has had to face them in the full glare and publicity of a High 
Court trial. It is my responsibility to make clear that the defendant has failed in his defence of truth, 
to vindicate the claimant and to award him a sum in damages that represents fair compensation. (at 
[162]–[163])73
70
p. 527
71
72
73
17. Defamation
Page 48 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Thus, while the purpose of personal injury damages is primarily compensatory, damages for defamation (as 
well as being compensatory in respect of hurt feelings and distress as well as material losses caused by the 
defamatory statement) incorporate the additional purposes of vindication (repairing and re-establishing the 
claimant’s reputation), and—to a lesser extent—punishment and deterrence (John v MGN Ltd [1997] at 607). 
In addition, in Cairns v Modi the Court of Appeal recognised the potential of the so-called ‘percolation 
phenomenon’ to increase the amount of damages awarded where the defamatory statement has ‘gone viral’:
we recognise that as a consequence of modern technology and communication systems any such 
stories will have the capacity to ‘go viral’ more widely and more quickly than ever before. Indeed it is 
obvious that today, with the ready availability of the world wide web and of social networking sites, 
the scale of this problem has been immeasurably enhanced, especially for libel claimants who are 
already, for whatever reason, in the public eye. In our judgment, in agreement with the judge, this 
percolation phenomenon is a legitimate factor to be taken into account in the assessment of damage. 
(Judge LCJ at [27])
↵
Traditionally damages were assessed by the jury. This led to a wide variety in level of awards 
particularly when compared to those for personal injury as the jurors were, in Bingham MR’s words, left ‘in 
the position of sheep loosed on an unfenced common, with no shepherd’ (John v MGN at 608).74 Since the 
Court of Appeal’s decision in John v MGN, judges had been able to inform juries of the level of damages in 
personal injury cases as a way of trying to guide their decision and prevent disproportionate libel awards. 
And, of course, now that the presumption of a jury trial has been abolished (Defamation Act 2013, s 11), this is 
now a matter for the judge.
An award of damages can be accompanied by a final injunction prohibiting further publication of the 
defamatory material. An injunction is an immediate court order preventing someone from taking certain 
steps, and a defendant who fails to comply can be imprisoned for contempt of court. An injunction can be 
obtained before a case is heard to prevent the further dissemination of potentially defamatory material in a 
matter of days or, in extremely urgent cases, a matter of hours. More often an injunction is awarded after a 
statement has been accepted by the courts as defamatory. This is relatively uncontroversial.
Section 13 of the Defamation Act 2013 provides a further avenue for the removal of defamatory material 
requiring (a) the website operator to remove the statement or (b) any other person to ‘stop distributing, 
selling or exhibiting material containing the statement’. In Blackledge v Person(s) Unknown (Being the Authors, 
Editors and Publishers of the Website https://metooucu.blogspot.com) <https://metooucu.blogspot.com> [2021], 
false and seriously defamatory allegations of sexual misconduct by the claimant, a politics and ethics 
academic, were anonymously posted on a website. The defendant’s identity remained unknown throughout 
the case and to this day. In light of the significant impact of the defamatory statements on the claimant and 
his credibility and career, as well as the manner and reach of their publication, the claimant was awarded 
£70,000 in damages. He is unlikely to recover these. Given that the defendant is unlikely to comply with the 
injunction (awarded nonetheless to remove the posts) the judge held:
p. 528
74
17. Defamation
Page 49 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
an order requiring Google to remove the Website is justified and wholly appropriate. … Where an 
injunction may not be effective, as in the instant case, an order under section 13 is an appropriate 
and proportionate remedy. On the facts of this case, where D has hidden their identity, a section 13 
order is likely to be the only remedy that is capable of providing effective and meaningful protection 
to C’s civil rights. (Saini J at [61])
Test your understanding by trying this section’s self-test questions <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-self-test-questions-17-9>.
17.10  The Defamation Act 2013—Annotated
In Figure 17.1 we have annotated extracts from the Defamation Act 2013, highlighting the key issues which 
have been discussed in this chapter.
Access an interactive annotated copy of the Act <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-  
student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-17-annotated-statute-defamation-act-2013-interactive> and click on the 
highlighted phrases for author commentary. You can also download a non-interactive copy of the annotated 
extract <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-17-  
annotated-statute-defamation-act-2013>.
17. Defamation
Page 50 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
17. Defamation
Page 51 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
17. Defamation
Page 52 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
17. Defamation
Page 53 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
17. Defamation
Page 54 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
17. Defamation
Page 55 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Figure 17.1 The Defamation Act 2013
17.11  Conclusion
Defamation protects an individual’s or a company’s reputation by allowing them to prevent the publication 
of, or recover damages for, public statements that have caused or are likely to cause serious harm to the 
reputation of the claimant. In so doing, the courts have to decide whether an individual’s interest in what 
people think of them should trump the freedom of others to be able to say what they know, or think they 
know, about them.
In order to bring a claim, the statement must be defamatory (as opposed to simply insulting), it must refer to 
the claimant and must be published. The defendant can, however, defeat a claim in defamation by virtue of a 
number of defences, many of which have been put on a statutory footing in the Defamation Act 2013.
Decision Tree 17.1 shows the elements of a claim in defamation and common defences. For the purposes of 
this decision tree:
C must be domiciled in the UK or a member state (under s 9 courts have no jurisdiction unless 
England and Wales is the ‘most appropriate place’ to bring a claim).
All section references are to the Defamation Act 2013 unless stated otherwise.
p. 529
p. 530
p. 531
p. 532
p. 533
p. 534
17. Defamation
Page 56 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Explore the elements a claim and relevant defences using the interactive version of this decision tree <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-17-interactive- 
decision-tree-17-1>.
17. Defamation
Page 57 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
17. Defamation
Page 58 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Decision Tree 17.1 Defamation claims and defences
17. Defamation
Page 59 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
1
2
3
→
→
→
→
→
End-of-chapter questions
After reading the chapter carefully, try answering the questions which follow.
Who can and who cannot sue in defamation? Explain the reasons for this.
When will defendants who disseminate or host a defamatory statement made by another escape liability? Do 
you think this provides sufficient protection for victims of defamatory statements posted online?
The Defamation Act 2013 has done much to clarify and improve the balance between protecting an 
individual’s reputation and the freedom of speech of others. Do you agree?
If you would like to know what we think, check the answer guidance <https://iws.oupsupport.com/ebook/  
access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-17-answers-to-end-of-chapter-questions? 
options=showName>.
Answering the problem question
Consider again the problem question at the start of this chapter. Now having read about the topic, what 
would be your advice to the various parties?
Here are some pointers to get you started:
The headline clearly wasn’t intended to refer to Maverick, but how would the reasonable reader interpret 
the headline and image?
Does Maverick’s statement about the ability of his colleagues ‘appointed in the 1990s’ refer to Raya?
Has Kit’s WhatsApp message caused, or is likely to cause, Maverick serious harm?
If you need some more guidance:
See the annotated version of the problem with issues and cases to consider <https://  
iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-17-annotated- 
problem-question-interactive>.
Check your answer against the suggested outline answer <https://iws.oupsupport.com/embed/access/  
content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-17-answers-to-problem-question>.
p. 535
p. 536
p. 537
17. Defamation
Page 60 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Further reading
In addition to the academic articles listed, the Inforrm blog (www.inforrm.wordpress.com <http://  
www.inforrm.wordpress.com>) is an excellent source of authoritative commentary on recent case law.
Barendt, Eric ‘Libel and Freedom of Speech in English Law’ [1993] Public Law 449
Collins, Matthew ‘Reflections on the Defamation Act 2013, one year after Royal Assent’ Inforrm’s blog 25 April 2014
Dee, Juliet ‘Fighting Back: Is Defamation Law a Double-Edged Sword for #MeToo Victims?’ 55(2) First Amendment 
Studies 148
Erdos, David ‘Serious Harm to Reputation Rights? Defamation in the Supreme Court’ [2019] Cambridge Law Journal 
510
Gibbons, Thomas ‘Defamation Reconsidered’ (1996) 16 Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 587
Howarth, David ‘Libel: Its Purpose and Reform’ (2011) 74 Modern Law Review 845
↵
McNamara, Lawrence Reputation and Defamation (OUP 2007)
Mullis, Alastair and Andrew Scott ‘Something Rotten in the State of English Libel Law? A Rejoinder to the Clamour for 
Reform of Defamation’ (2009) 14 Communications Law 173
Mullis, Alastair and Andrew Scott ‘Tilting at Windmills: The Defamation Act 2013’ (2014) 77 Modern Law Review 87
O’Callaghan, Patrick ‘The Law of Defamation—Part 1 and Part II’ in Butterworths Common Law Series: The Law of Tort 
(Butterworths 2014) chs 25 and 26
Price, James and Felicity McMahon (eds) Blackstone’s Guide to the Defamation Act 2013 (OUP 2013)
Additional suggestions for further reading can be found in this chapter’s web links <https://iws.oupsupport.com/  
ebook/access/content/horsey9e-student-resources/horsey9e-chapter-17-web-links?options=showName>.
Notes
 
1. For information: Maverick is the name of the main character in the 2022 film Top Gun: Maverick (www.imdb.com/ 
title/tt1745960/ <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1745960/>). This information is not contained in the original message.
 
2. Though some non-permanent forms of publication are treated as libel by virtue of various statutory provisions—e.g. 
radio and television (Broadcasting Act 1990, s 166) and public theatre performances (Theatres Act 1968, s 4).
 
3. See e.g. Griffin v North Cumbria Integrated Care NHS Foundation Trust [2024] which involved a reference given over 
the telephone (‘Judgment in rare slander trial’ 5rb.com 8 February 2024).
 
4. See e.g. Faulks Committee Report of the Committee on Defamation (Cmnd 5909, 1975) [91]; J M Kaye ‘Libel or 
Slander: Two Torts or One?’ (1972) 91 Law Quarterly Review 524.
p. 538
1.
2.
3.
4.
17. Defamation
Page 61 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
5. Until the 2013 Act there were four exceptions to the need to prove special damage in cases of slander: where the 
statement imputed: (a) criminal conduct (Webb v Beavan [1883]); (b) that the claimant has a contagious disease 
(Bloodworth v Gray [1844]); (c) incompetence in business dealings (as clarified by the Defamation Act 1952, s 2); and (d) 
a lack of chastity in a woman (Slander of Women Act 1891, s 1). However, s 14 of the 2013 Act abolished the dated and 
potentially discriminatory (b) (‘contagious diseases’) and (d) (‘lack of chastity in a woman’) exceptions.
 
6. The most recent annual judicial statistics for 2023, published in July 2024, stated there were 250 defamation claims 
issued in 2023. It has been suggested that this is the result of a mis-categorisation by the Ministry of Justice and that 
the true figure is closer to 111 new cases (‘Judicial Statistics, 2023: “A 60% decrease in issued defamation claims but 
doubts remain over the reliability of the figures”’ Inforrm’s blog 30 July 2024).
 
7. Tony Weir An Introduction to Tort Law (2nd edn OUP 2006) 176.
 
8. Patrick Wintor ‘ “Laughing stock” libel laws to be reformed, says Nick Clegg’ The Guardian 6 January 2011.
 
9. Matthew Collins ‘Reflections on the Defamation Act 2013: One Year after Royal Assent’ Inforrm’s blog 25 April 2014. 
For a helpful overview and assessment of the Act ten years on, see Iain Wilson, Max Campbell, Tom Double and Percy 
Preston ‘Defamation Act 2013: A summary and overview 10 years on’ Inforrm’s blog 30 December 2024.
 
10. You may find it helpful to refer to the annotated version of the Defamation Act 2013 (section 17.10 You can also 
download this from the online resources.).
 
11. Though he went on to say that where the company has suffered no financial loss, damages should be kept within 
modest bounds (at [27]).
 
12. As seen in Brett Wilson LLP v Persons Unknown [2015]; Gubarev v Orbis Business Intelligence [2020].
 
13. For some time now there have been calls for new legislation to ‘stamp out’ so-called SLAPPs (strategic lawsuits 
against public protection) which include but are not limited to defamation claims and which are increasingly being 
used by the super-rich to stifle legitimate reporting and debate. In November 2024, the justice minister, Heidi 
Alexander MP, confirmed that such legislation would not be introduced in the current parliamentary session. Of 
course, the use of the threat—and reality—of defamation (and other legal) actions is not new. See e.g. the so-called 
‘McLibel’ trial, the longest running libel case in England, in which two environmental activists were sued by 
McDonald’s over critical claims they had made in a six-page leaflet titled: ‘What’s wrong with McDonald’s: everything 
they don’t want you to know’ (www.mcspotlight.org <http://www.mcspotlight.org>A case study on the McLibel trial 
can be found in the online resources.).
 
14. Ben Dowell ‘McAlpine libel: 20 tweeters including Sally Bercow pursued for damages’ The Guardian 23 November 
2012; McAlpine v Bercow [2013] is discussed in section 17.3.1.
 
15. See e.g. Owen Bowcott ‘Complaints to solicitors’ regulator over libel demands from Galloway’s lawyers’ The 
Guardian 4 March 2015. Although there are other times when an MP’s ability to bring defamation claims is right and 
proper. See e.g. Richard Burgon MP’s successful claim—amounting to £30,000—against The Sun newspaper suggesting 
he had joined a band which ‘delights in Nazi symbols’ (at [1]) (Burgon v News Group Newspapers [2019]).
 
16. Though cf Gavin Phillipson ‘London: the capital of libel tourism?’ The Guardian 29 March 2010.
 
17. See e.g. Jason Donovan and Robbie Williams’s successful claims against The Face magazine (in 1992) and The 
People newspaper (in 2005) over suggestions they were homosexual. In each case, the defamatory statement was not, 
it was argued, being called ‘gay’, but rather the implication of hypocrisy in the suggestion that they were lying to their 
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
17. Defamation
Page 62 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
fans about their sexuality, discussed in Vincent Graff ‘Gay? Not gay? So what! Why should it be a matter for the libel 
lawyers?’ The Independent, 11 December 2005. See further Alexandros Antoniouin and Dimitris Akrivos 
‘Homosexuality, Defamatory Meaning and Reputational Injury in English Law’ in Kirsty Horsey (ed) Diverse Voices in 
Tort Law (Bristol University Press 2024) 175.
 
18. Compare e.g. Kerr v Kennedy [1942] 1 KB 409; Liberace v Daily Mirror Newspapers (1959) The Times, 17 and 18 June 
(discussed in Roy Greenslade ‘Liberace, the Daily Mirror and a libel trial fiasco …’ The Guardian 12 June 2013) and 
Youssoupoff v Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures Ltd [1934].
 
19. The case returned to the High Court in July 2022 (eight years after the articles were first published) where Nicklin J 
dismissed the newspaper’s public interest defence (see section 17.6.3) and ordered the publishers to pay £120,000 in 
damages (Lachaux v Independent Print Ltd and others [2021]). For an application of s 1(1) post-Lachaux, see Tom 
Double ‘Where are we now with serious harm? Understanding section 1 of the Defamation Act 2013’ Inforrm’s Blog 25 
October 2023 and Blake v Fox [2024a] in which Collins Rice J found two tweets in which actor Laurence Fox had falsely 
called the claimants ‘paedophiles’ was ‘on the evidence, probabilities and facts of this case, seriously harmful, 
defamatory and baseless’ (at [166]). Both claimants were awarded £90,000 in damages and a permanent injunction 
(Blake v Fox [2024b]). The preliminary issues were determined for reasons set out in judgments of Nicklin J (Blake v Fox 
[2022b]) and the Court of Appeal (Blake v Fox [2023]).
 
20. Each case will depend on its own facts. In Dyson v MGN Ltd [2023], the judge declined to find that the contested 
statement had caused serious harm despite being published in a national newspaper.
 
21. Charleston might be considered an early example of ‘deep-fake’ imagery. Technological advances now mean that it 
is extremely difficult (if not impossible for the untrained viewer) to know that what they are viewing is not real. This is 
particularly prevalent in the context of image-based sexual abuse, where the images are often referred to as 
‘fakeporn’. Such images are clearly defamatory (and in some instances criminal) (Rackley et al ‘Seeking Justice and 
Redress for Victim-Survivors of Image-Based Sexual Abuse’ (2021) 29 Feminist Legal Studies 293).
 
22. Stocker predates the 2013 Act and so refers to the common law defence of ‘justification’ (as amended by s 5 of the 
Defamation Act 1952) which is abolished by s 2 of the 2013 Act which broadly reflects the same defence (discussed 
further in section 17.6.1).
 
23. Which has since been replaced by s 2(3) of the Defamation Act 2013.
 
24. See e.g. in the cases of the so-called ‘Black Cab Rapist’ (DSD v The Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2014] 
discussed in section 6.3.1) and Jimmy Savile.
 
25. See e.g. BBC News ‘Rape social media posts: How speaking out got twin sisters sued’ 24 February 2021. In Starr v 
Ward [2015], a woman who said she was groped by comedian Freddie Starr in 1974 behind the scenes of Jimmy 
Savile’s Clunk Click TV show when she was 15 successfully defended a defamation claim brought by Starr against her. 
It was reported that Starr faced a £1 million costs bill and lost £300,000 from shows being cancelled over the 
allegations (BBC News ‘Freddie Starr loses groping defamation case’ 10 July 2015). See further Brett Wilson, ‘#MeToo, 
naming and shaming: a risky business?’ Inforrm’s blog 2 November 2017; Julie Bindel ‘Women who allege abuse 
mustn’t be silenced by rich men’s libel threats’ The Guardian 23 January 2019.
 
26. The wealth of the claimant is important. In Lee v Brown [2022], a former partner unsuccessfully attempted to sue his 
former partner for comments she had made on Facebook stating that she was ‘repeatedly and consistently … 
subjected by Mr Lee to serious abuse of a controlling and coercive nature throughout their cohabitation’ (at [25]). 
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
17. Defamation
Page 63 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
While the comments were clearly defamatory, Lee, who represented himself, had not established that they had 
caused, or were likely to cause, ‘serious harm’. Collins Rice J continued: ‘It is notoriously difficult for a litigant in 
person, however informed and articulate, to bring a successful defamation action. That is because the law is detailed 
and complex, highly fact-sensitive, sometimes counter-intuitive, and contains traps for the inexperienced. It is an area 
of expert legal practice, daunting even for other legal professionals’ (at [31]). Had Lee been able to, or had chosen to, 
instruct counsel, he might well have been successful.
 
27. Harriet Wistrich, Centre for Women’s Justice in Southall Black Sisters ‘Press Release: Lachaux v Independent News 
Print Ltd and Another’ (no date): www.southallblacksisters.org.uk/news/press-release-lachaux-v-independent- 
news-print-limited-and-another <http://www.southallblacksisters.org.uk/news/press-release-lachaux-v-  
independent-news-print-limited-and-another>.
 
28. ‘Promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression’ A/76/258, 30 July 2021, [22].
 
29. Once the judge had held that a statement was capable of being defamatory as a matter of law, it was for a jury to 
decide whether it was in fact defamatory. The presumption in favour of a jury trial was removed by s 11 of the 
Defamation Act 2013 which states that a trial is to be ‘without a jury unless the court orders otherwise’. The 
circumstances in which a defamation case might be heard with a jury was considered in Tim Yeo MP v Times 
Newspapers [2014]. Refusing the application in the instant case, Walby J held that there were no ‘skills, knowledge, 
aptitudes or other attributes likely to be possessed by a jury which would make it better equipped than a judge to 
grapple with the issues that arise and may need to be tried’. Nor is it the case ‘that the verdict or judgment in this case 
could have consequences so profound for public life that it would be appropriate to involve a jury’. Indeed, the greater 
the public interest, the more need there was for the case to be heard by judge alone, ‘with the reasoned judgment that 
only such a mode of trial would bring. There are real risks of a jury verdict being unclear or misunderstood or both’ (at 
[53]). On this reasoning a jury trial in the near future seems unlikely. This is further underlined by Nicklin J’s refusal to 
allow for a jury trial as requested by actor Laurence Fox in Blake v Fox [2022a].
 
30. See also discussion in Monroe v Hopkins [2017] at [44]–[59].
 
31. Or even if the defendant had no knowledge of the defamatory statement at the time it was published. In Monir v 
Wood [2018], the former chairman on UKIP’s Bristol branch was liable for a defamatory tweet posted by the then Vice 
Chairman. It was no excuse to say that he had delegated responsibility for its Twitter account to him who in turn was 
acting as his ‘agent’.
 
32. For a recent example, see Lena Durham’s post on Buzzfeed in which she apologises to the man mistakenly 
identified as her rapist after matching the pseudonym she used in her book Not that Kind of Girl (‘Why I choose to 
speak out’ 9 December 2014).
 
33. What if, e.g. a man is wrongly identified in the local and national press as a rapist? In April 2014, it was reported that 
the police paid ‘substantial damages’ to a man who was wrongly identified as a rapist on the BBC News website and in 
the Oxford Mail newspaper. In this case, the police had supplied the press with the wrong photo, and so there was a 
straightforward claim against them (the case was settled). Following O’Shea, what do you think are the chances of a 
successful claim against the BBC and Oxford Mail? (Dominic Ponsford ‘Police pay substantial damages to man wrongly 
identified in the press as a rapist’ Press Gazette 22 April 2014.)
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
17. Defamation
Page 64 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
34. Similarly, statements exchanged between married couples are not regarded as being published. One’s spouse is not 
a third party. Insofar as there is good sense in allowing partners to be able to communicate as they wish without fear 
of legal consequences, so as to avoid ‘disastrous results to social life’ (Wennhak v Morgan [1888] at 639) this should 
apply to all partners, married or otherwise.
 
35. Hugh Tomlinson ‘Case Law: Webb v Jones, Facebook libel claimants beware!’ Inforrm’s blog 26 June 2021.
 
36. See further Monroe v Hopkins (based on two tweets posted within a couple of hours of each other, and a further five 
within the next 24 hours which were assessed together) and Webb v Jones (where seven Facebook posts, within a 
thread running to 150 pages and 382 comments, were treated as separate publications).
 
37. The action was ultimately struck out on the facts on the basis that the damage to the claimant’s reputation was not 
sufficiently serious.
 
38. To date, there have been no reported cases using a s 5 reflection. Wilson et al argue of the ‘complicated and 
onerous’ process which is ‘probably unattractive to website operators who will often have no interest in the matter 
and/or be able rely on other substantive defences’ (n9).
 
39. N9.
 
40. Also where the claimant has consented (either expressly or impliedly) to the publication of the defamatory 
material, this will be a defence (Cookson v Harewood [1932]).
 
41. The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, s 8 provides a statutory exception to this. When referring to a spent 
conviction, the defendant must show both that it is true and an absence of malice in publishing the information (s 
8(5)).
 
42. The burden of proof is lower in civil cases as the claimant in Coker v Nwkanma [2021] learned to his cost. He sued 
his friend over an allegation that he had sexually assaulted a woman at the defendant’s house. The judge found that 
‘on the balance of probabilities’ (which while flexible in its application, the more serious the allegation or the more 
serious the consequences if the allegation is proved, ‘the stronger must be the evidence before a court will find the 
allegation proved on the balance of probabilities’ (at [14]) is a lower standard than the criminal standard of 
reasonable doubt) the allegation was true (at [57]). As Max Campbell notes: ‘Saini J’s observation about the apparent 
“flexibility” in the application of the civil standard of proof is a doubled-edged sword: whilst it means that a judge will 
be less quick to make findings of serious criminality, it also means that the reputational damage arising from such 
findings, if made, is worse (because the findings, whilst on the balance of probabilities, have expressly not been made 
lightly)’ (‘Case Law, Coker v Nwkanma, Search for vindication backfires, court finds serious sexual assault committed’ 
Inforrm’s blog 4 June 2021).
 
43. Consider again the BBC Radio 5 presenter’s comment in the examples at the beginning of the chapter. His 
statement is clearly defamatory. But could he rely on the defence of truth? This will depends on how the specific 
allegations are interpreted.
 
44. In June 2022, a jury in Virginia awarded Depp compensatory damages of US$10 million, as well as punitive damages 
for defamatory statements made by Amber Heard in the Washington Post. In December 2022, it was reported that 
Amber Heard had agreed to a legal settlement with Depp. For a detailed comparison of the UK and US cases, see 
Matthew Scott ‘Depp v Heard: Why did an American jury reach a different decision than the English judge?’ 
BarristerBlog 2 June 2022.
 
45. Refuge responds to Johnny Depp losing his libel case, 2 November 2020.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
17. Defamation
Page 65 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
46. Tamsin Allen and Daniel Shaw ‘Case Comment: Depp v NGN—an analysis of the judgment’, Bindmans website, 14 
December 2020.
 
47. These comments must now be read in light of the Court of Appeal’s comprehensive reversal of Jay J’s decision: ‘In 
our view, the Judge not only seriously transgressed the core principle that a judge remains neutral during the 
evidence, but he also acted in a manner which was, at times, manifestly unfair and hostile to the claimant … the 
nature, tenor and frequency of the Judge’s interventions were such as to render this libel trial unfair’ (Serafin v 
Malkiewicz and others [2019] at [119]). The case was ultimately considered by the Supreme Court, which agreed with 
the Court of Appeal in relation to Jay J’s treatment of the claimant but found, ‘with a degree of embarrassment in 
relation to respected colleagues’ (at [78]), the Court of Appeal to have wrongly applied the law in relation to s 4 of the 
Act (see further section 17.6.3) and remitted the case for a full retrial (rather than simply on the determination of 
costs as ordered by the Court of Appeal) (Serafin v Malkiewicz and others [2020]).
 
48. See e.g. collection of BBC News stories tagged as ‘Wagatha Christie trial’: www.bbc.co.uk/news/topics/ 
cxy7xky2047t <https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/topics/cxy7xky2047t>; ‘Rooney v Vardy: The Breakdown’, a podcast 
hosted by Coleen Rooney’s lawyers, Paul Lunt and Jamie Hurworth from Brabners LLP and Nick Curtis ‘Vardy v 
Rooney: The Wagatha Christie Trial at Wyndham’s Theatre review—hilarious and gripping’ Evening Standard 23 
November 2022You may find it interesting to watch BBC journalist, Ros Atkins, ‘On the Wagatha Christie Trial’, 
recorded before the judgment was handed down, which details how the case unfolded in the High Court..
 
49. Vardy will, of course, also have to pay her own legal costs. Lawyers for Vardy and Rooney are set to return to court 
to determine costs in 2025; in the meantime Vardy has been ordered to pay Rooney £100,000 towards the money she 
owes her (Jessica Rawnsley ‘Vardy ordered to pay £100,000 towards Rooney costs’ BBC News 9 October 2024).
 
50. David Allen Green ‘What Rebekah Vardy got wrong’ Prospect Magazine 2 August 2022.
 
51. Qualified privilege was often relied on by the media in the form of the so-called Reynolds defence. As we will see in 
section 17.6.3, s 4 abolishes the common law Reynolds defence; however, the defence of qualified privilege extends 
beyond the category of privilege recognised in Reynolds.
 
52. This has been used by MPs and members of the House of Lords to circumvent reporting restrictions imposed by the 
courts. For example, in October 2018, Lord Hain relied on privilege in order to name Sir Philip Green as the 
businessman at the centre of an injunction linked to allegations known as the ‘British #MeToo scandal’. (See further 
Jessica Elgot ‘Sir Philip Green named as man at heart of “UK #MeToo scandal”’ The Guardian 26 October 2018.)
 
53. For an application of the defence of qualified privilege, see ABC (A Mother) v The Chief Constable of West Yorkshire 
Police [2017] where it was held that a defamatory statement made in the context of an allegation of child sexual abuse 
was privileged. The police had a duty to communicate with Social Services who have a corresponding duty to receive 
it. In any event, the case failed on the basis that the claimant had failed to prove the publication of the defamatory 
statement had, or was likely to, cause the claimant serious harm.
 
54. Leaving open the question as to whether the defence would have been successful in Singh (cf James Price and 
Felicity McMahon (eds) Blackstone’s Guide to the Defamation Act 2013 (OUP 2013) 102).
 
55. See e.g. Serafin v Malkiewicz [2020] in which the Supreme Court, approving the decision of the Court of Appeal in 
Economou v de Freitas, emphasised the material difference between the Reynolds defence and that in s 4 and that 
they should not be equated, nor should the Reynolds factors be used as a checklist in the context of s 4:
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
17. Defamation
Page 66 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
… the Bill, as introduced, did in effect make reference to the Reynolds factors but later they were 
deliberately omitted. Subject to what some may regard as only a quibble, the observations of Sharp LJ [in 
Economou v de Freitas] are valid. The quibble, if such it be, relates to her use of the word ‘checklist’. I 
suggest that a check list is a list of factors to which reference ought to be made, in particular in order to 
check whether a preliminary conclusion should be confirmed. … But, in removing the listed matters from 
the Bill and in proceeding to substitute a reference to all the circumstances, Parliament made clear its 
intention that the Reynolds factors, upon which the list had been based, were not to be used as a check list. 
Even if, at the time of the decision in the Reynolds case, it was appropriate to describe the factors identified 
by Lord Nicholls as a check list, it is clearly inappropriate so to regard them in the context of the statutory 
defence. But, as Sharp LJ proceeded to explain, that is not to deny that one or more of them may well be 
relevant to whether the defendant’s belief was reasonable within the meaning of subsection (1)(b). (at [69])
 
56. Explanatory Notes at [29].
 
57. Price and McMahon n54 75.
 
58. This had not been raised by the defendant—he had received inadequate legal advice. The judge adjourned the 
claimants’ summary judgment application, to enable him to take advice and, if so advised, raise the defence at a later 
hearing. The defendant chose not to do this. He was later ordered to pay £80,000 in damages and the claimant’s costs.
 
59. This case is another example of the extent to which bringing a defamation claim can be a double-edged sword. As 
Oliver Lock notes:
Being accused of a sexual crime is, of course, one of the most damaging accusations that can be made 
against an individual and, if that allegation is false, he or she will want to do all in their power to fight it. 
However, this case … should be a warning against taking such robust action when doing so may harm your 
reputation further. In pursuing a libel case against the Defendant, Mr Economou has found his name at the 
centre of a widely publicised libel judgment. The particular sensitivities of this case also called for 
thoughtfulness when Mr Economou was deciding how to deal with the allegations that had been made 
against him. Perhaps it would have been more prudent to take action against the publishers of the story, 
rather than a grieving father.
⤴(‘Case Law: Economou v de Freitas, Is it interesting? New judgment considers the scope of the “public interest” 
defence’ Inforrm’s blog 28 September 2016.)
 
60. Though they will still be held to some standards. In Riley v Sivier [2022], Rachel Riley won £50,000 over claims she 
was a ‘serial abuser’ and had bullied a teenager. While the defendant was held to have published on a matter of public 
interest, and to have believed it to be in the public interest, his belief was:
‘manifestly unreasonable’ … he failed to make such enquiries as were reasonably required in the 
circumstances; he had no reasonable grounds for making the factual allegations that he did, which 
misrepresented the evidential picture; and the article was wholly unbalanced. (at [163], [180])
⤴Sivier is reported to have appealed.
56.
57.
58.
59.
⤴
60.
⤴
17. Defamation
Page 67 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
 
61. See further and compare Doyle v Smith [2018] and discussion in Jacob Rowbottom ‘Citizen journalists, standards of 
care, and the public interest defence in defamation’ Inforrm’s blog 18 December 2018.
 
62. The trial judge also found that the tweet did not cause serious harm to Mr Banks’s reputation. This was upheld by 
the Court of Appeal (at [10]).
 
63. In May 2023, Cadwalladr was ordered to pay legal costs of around £1.2 million to Banks.
 
64. In Riley v Murray, the Court of Appeal confirmed that where the opinion defended is based on a single specific fact, 
the s 3 defence will fail if that fact is untrue (at [59]).
 
65. See e.g. Archie Bland ‘Julie Burchill agrees to pay Ash Sarkar “substantial damages” in libel case’ The Guardian, 16 
March 2021.
 
66. BBC News ‘McCanns welcome papers’ apology’ 19 March 2008.
 
67. Press Association ‘Riots Good Samaritan wins poster libel payout from Met police’ The Guardian 3 May 2013.
 
68. ‘Melania Trump—An Apology’ Daily Telegraph 26 January 2019.
 
69. Peter Walker ‘Tory peer pays damages after alleging University Challenge mascot was antisemitic’ The Guardian 6 
March 2024.
 
70. Harry Cockburn ‘Katie Hopkins’ legal bills to top £300,000 after losing High Court battle to Jack Monroe’ The 
Independent 10 March 2017. In January 2018, Hopkins’s application for appeal was refused and in September 2018 she 
was reported as filing for an insolvency agreement to avoid bankruptcy.
 
71. The judge may also choose to award nominal damages. In Wright v McCormack [2022], the judge awarded just £1 to 
the claimant (a computer scientist and ‘self-proclaimed inventor of bitcoin’) in a defamation case against a blogger 
who had accused him of fraud. Though he won his case, his damages were reduced on the basis that ‘he advanced a 
deliberately false case and put forward deliberately false evidence until days before trial’ (at 149). The award was 
upheld on appeal (Wright v McCormack [2023]).
 
72. The perpetrator was subsequently expelled from school and received a caution for common assault.
 
73. Yaxley-Lennon declared himself bankrupt before the trial. In October 2024, he was jailed for 18 months for 
contempt of court in relation to ten breaches of a High Court order relating to the case.
 
74. See further and compare the award of ‘top bracket’ damages (£185,000) in Shakil-Ur-Rahman v ARY Network Ltd 
[2016] with the award of just £10 (reflecting the claimant’s ‘disgraceful’ behaviour before and during the litigation) in 
Flymenow Ltd v Quick Air Jet Charter GmbH [2016].
© Kirsty Horsey & Erika Rackley 2025
Related Books
View the Essential Cases in tort law
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
17. Defamation
Page 68 of 68
Printed from Oxford Law Trove. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a single article for 
personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: Serials Dept; date: 02 May 2026
Related Links
Test yourself: Multiple choice questions with instant feedback <https://learninglink.oup.com/access/content/brennan-  
concentrate6e-student-resources/brennan-concentrate6e-diagnostic-test>
Find This Title
In the OUP print catalogue <https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780198925231>
